[Amit Varma]: The other day someone asked me, give me an example of the seen and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Now everything is an example because there is so much unseen in everything.
[Amit Varma]: But one perfect example is this.
[Amit Varma]: Men and women.
[Amit Varma]: We live in a world designed by men, for men and that world is the seen world.
[Amit Varma]: Women have to fit themselves into this world and all that they do to fit in, all that they
[Amit Varma]: go through inside is unseen by men and often by women themselves.
[Amit Varma]: We tell ourselves the world is what it is.
[Amit Varma]: We normalize as many oppressions and injustices.
[Amit Varma]: The cost of this is a psychological cost that cannot be measured.
[Amit Varma]: The cost of this is also an economic cost that we can try to measure and that is more
[Amit Varma]: than just a number.
[Amit Varma]: If we care about the world we live in, we have to try and peel away the layers of this
[Amit Varma]: unseen world of the Indian woman who is lonely in the kitchen, lonely in her bedroom, lonely
[Amit Varma]: at the workplace.
[Amit Varma]: If we want to solve this problem, first we have to try to understand it.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Unknown]: science.
[Unknown]: Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: My guest today is Shreyana Bhattacharya, an economist at the World Bank and the author
[Amit Varma]: of a brilliant new book called Desperately Seeking Shahrukh, India's Lonely Young Women
[Amit Varma]: and the Search for Intimacy and Independence.
[Amit Varma]: This is not a book on Shahrukh Khan or cinema.
[Amit Varma]: This is a book on the loneliness of the Indian woman.
[Amit Varma]: And it is a book that is constructed on a mind-boggling scale.
[Amit Varma]: This is a book that contains anthropology, sociology and economics, disciplines that
[Amit Varma]: often don't come together.
[Amit Varma]: And it is told with storytelling that stands with the best of literature.
[Amit Varma]: We see the interior lives of women across different classes and castes and regions and
[Amit Varma]: circumstances, in the bedroom and in the kitchen, in barren fields and concrete offices, united
[Amit Varma]: by crippling solitude, which Shreyana explores through the device of their common love for
[Amit Varma]: Shahrukh Khan.
[Amit Varma]: This is also reflected in numbers, in the many movements within the labor market, in
[Amit Varma]: an impact on our economy that is more tangible than feelings.
[Amit Varma]: And this is what is so amazing about this book and about Shreyana's gaze.
[Amit Varma]: She is as good at zooming in as she is at zooming out.
[Amit Varma]: We get inside the heads of different young women across the country.
[Amit Varma]: And we also get a sense of the bigger picture.
[Amit Varma]: Economists and sociologists and anthropologists and novelists will often see different parts
[Amit Varma]: of the elephant.
[Amit Varma]: Shreyana sees them all equally well and shows us, well, the elephant in the room.
[Amit Varma]: That makes a book the best kind of scholarship.
[Amit Varma]: And it makes Shreyana the best kind of scholar.
[Amit Varma]: I hope young people listening to this and reading a book will find themselves inspired
[Amit Varma]: and energized.
[Amit Varma]: The conversation we had turned out to be so rich, not just because we spoke about the
[Amit Varma]: subject of a book.
[Amit Varma]: We also discussed academia and its perils and failures.
[Amit Varma]: We argued about Shahrukh Khan.
[Amit Varma]: And she also spoke about her many intellectual influences.
[Amit Varma]: Listen, I urge you, go into the show notes, pick up the book she recommends, read them,
[Amit Varma]: think about them.
[Amit Varma]: It's an education.
[Amit Varma]: As indeed I found this conversation to be.
[Amit Varma]: Before we get to it though, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Do you want to read more?
[Amit Varma]: I've put in a lot of work in recent years in building a reading habit.
[Amit Varma]: This means that I read more books, but I also read more long form articles and essays.
[Amit Varma]: There's a world of knowledge available through the internet.
[Amit Varma]: But the problem we all face is, how do we navigate this knowledge?
[Amit Varma]: How do we know what to read?
[Amit Varma]: How do we put the right incentives in place?
[Amit Varma]: Well, I discovered one way.
[Amit Varma]: A couple of friends of mine run this awesome company called CTQ Compounds at ctqcompounds.com,
[Amit Varma]: which aims to help people up-level themselves by reading more.
[Amit Varma]: A few months ago, I signed up for one of their programs called The Daily Reader.
[Amit Varma]: Every day for six months, they sent me a long form article to read.
[Amit Varma]: The subjects covered went from machine learning to mythology to mental models and marmalade.
[Amit Varma]: This helped me build a habit of reading.
[Amit Varma]: At the end of every day, I understood the world a little better than I did before.
[Amit Varma]: So if you want to build your reading habit, head on over to CTQ Compounds and check out
[Amit Varma]: their Daily Reader.
[Amit Varma]: New batches start every month.
[Amit Varma]: They also have a great program called Future Stack, which helps you stay up-to-date with
[Amit Varma]: ideas, skills, and mental models that will help you stay relevant in the future.
[Amit Varma]: Future Stack batches start every Saturday.
[Amit Varma]: What's more, you get a discount of a whopping 2,500 rupees, 2,500 if you use the discount
[Amit Varma]: code UNSEEN.
[Amit Varma]: So head on over to CTQ Compounds at ctqcompounds.com and use the code UNSEEN.
[Amit Varma]: Build yourself.
[Amit Varma]: about Indian society that can really open your eyes into how this country works in so
[Amit Varma]: many different ways and economics is just a part of it. But you know, before the book
[Amit Varma]: and before Shah Rukh, tell me a bit about yourself. So where did you grow up? What kind
[Amit Varma]: of kid were you? Do you remember watching your first Shah Rukh film?
[Guest]: I mean, I must actually say I don't have, I struggle to recall my childhood. So it's
[Guest]: not extremely lucid for me. I was born in Calcutta, then moved to Durgapur. So dad was
[Guest]: a steel, Tata steel man, worked in human resources. And I have very vivid memories of how stressful
[Guest]: that was for him because he used to manage negotiations with labor unions and workers,
[Guest]: which created a lot of, it's a difficult space to be because essentially he was constantly
[Guest]: bargaining while they were fighting for their rights. And so I think this notion of unions
[Guest]: and labor and what it means to be workers and what it means to manage large organizations
[Guest]: and keep people happy. I think seeing him struggle with that, I remember that very clearly.
[Guest]: And those are some interesting conversations from the past that I remember him just coming
[Guest]: back and grumbling about how entrenched patronage networks were essentially within labor unions
[Guest]: as well. This is particularly true for Jharkhand, Bengal, what was Bihar back then. And then
[Guest]: we moved, funnily enough, when I was around, I think five or four, to Chandigarh. And my
[Guest]: mother and father believe that I must be the most Punjabi of all bongs out there because
[Guest]: essentially that's Chandigarh was where I learned Hindi, my idioms, the way I speak,
[Guest]: all of that completely happened when I was there. I went to nursery school there. I have
[Guest]: very fond memories of Chandigarh. To me, it's just all sky and just a gorgeous area and
[Guest]: architecture and all of that. And then we moved to Delhi where my mother was working
[Guest]: as a social worker for the UNHCR. She was managing refugees who were coming in from
[Guest]: Afghanistan. And it was her job to help them fill out the paperwork to get benefits that
[Guest]: the UN essentially allocated to refugees were settling into India. And we had days and nights
[Guest]: where once she fainted in office, once she fainted at hospital because just the hours
[Guest]: and the expectations and the stress and it was, I think, psychologically very difficult.
[Guest]: Social work is a very difficult job psychologically. We know that. And I remember being a kid watching
[Guest]: her and being quite fearful, actually, of, you know, just how much she was dealing with
[Guest]: and how much she was doing. And all these young men and women who had come who were
[Guest]: hoping to resettle, they'd left everything, had abandoned their homes and livelihoods
[Guest]: in Afghanistan, were now in Delhi in defence colony, waiting outside a refugee centre and
[Guest]: all their hopes pinned on paperwork. Right. And I think somewhere there, perhaps my early
[Guest]: interest in the welfare state, the politics of paperwork, social protection, safety nets,
[Guest]: which is an area now I work on, really began, I think, watching my mum. So I'd finished
[Guest]: school. I'd be dropped off near her refugee centre. And I'd sit next to her. And there
[Guest]: were these hordes of young Afghan people who I couldn't understand what they were saying.
[Guest]: And there were interpreters. But I used to watch her and her patience with people. And
[Guest]: it just it was remarkable to me. And it was extremely exotic. And I remember that very
[Guest]: well. And on the other hand, my father at that time was working for Moria Sheraton.
[Guest]: You know, he was, again, managing human resources in a big hotel, very glamorous, but also extremely
[Guest]: hard hours, saying a lot of yes to things that I sensed he really didn't want to say
[Guest]: yes to and having to deal with, you know, we know hospitality is one of the most difficult
[Guest]: sectors to work in, because people just treat service staff and people who work in hospitality
[Guest]: terribly in our country, and they continue to do so. And I think my father really dealt
[Guest]: with that. So it was moving from labour unions into difficult customers, posh difficult customers
[Guest]: in Delhi. And I think my memory of childhood, honestly, is being very conscious of the jobs
[Guest]: that my parents did. I was very aware of just how complex those jobs were, how difficult
[Guest]: dealing with people was, because both their jobs involved with an immense amount of, you
[Guest]: know, constant negotiation with tons and tons of people. And there was this one scary moment,
[Guest]: which I'll, I'll never forget, which is we used to live in this home in Delhi. And one
[Guest]: night, essentially, someone broke the glass of the house. And later, we found out it was
[Guest]: actually one of the Afghan refugees, because he was upset that my mother had not signed
[Guest]: off on a piece of paper, he'd found out, I don't know how, there was all kinds of case
[Guest]: files that were formed. And I think I just grew up realising that our lives are very
[Guest]: precarious. I mean, seeing that, right, that someone felt the urge to essentially violate
[Guest]: someone's home and to make someone feel unsafe. It came from the fact that they themselves
[Guest]: felt so unsafe and so precarious in their life. So I think my childhood, I mean, I remember
[Guest]: as a kid, I just remember being very conscious of these very early memories. Somehow this
[Guest]: has stayed with me. And then the other stuff was just incredibly banal, right? So I went
[Guest]: to a school in Delhi, I, you know, picked up all the reading habits that are very typical
[Guest]: of kids born in the early 1980s. I think, you know, right from be it, you know, Enid
[Guest]: Leighton to, I started reading Jane Austen, I think much earlier than many of my other
[Guest]: friends probably did. I was quite young. And, and I think through that, suddenly then being
[Guest]: exposed to satellite television in the early 90s, which was just so incredibly exciting,
[Guest]: right? I mean, I've heard you talk about this with so many of your other guests in the past.
[Guest]: And being obsessed with the X files and discovering mathematics, which was for me at a point of
[Guest]: time was just a really, to me, math was just this beautiful language, which I really wanted
[Guest]: to understand and use, but I struggled to completely. I'm not a great mathematician,
[Guest]: but it's something that's always interested me. And so I just remember my childhood being,
[Guest]: you know, spending a lot of time with books, struggling with trying to understand a lot
[Guest]: of math problems and puzzles. I think that was something that was really important and
[Guest]: fun for me to do. I wasn't a very social kid. I'm not still very social. I'm quite reticent
[Guest]: and a bit of a recluse. And I think observing people who are very social has been part of,
[Guest]: I think, my growing up years. I mean, when I was a teenager, even in, you know, my late
[Guest]: teens, I was friends with people who are far more boisterous than, you know, popular girls
[Guest]: in school or boys who are really sought after for their social credentials or who they were.
[Guest]: And I watched. I think maybe because I read Jane Austen at a very early age, I learned
[Guest]: the value and pleasure of just watching and observing. And so, yeah, I think those have
[Guest]: been the sense of experiences, I think the books. And as for Shah Rukh, I encountered
[Guest]: him. My mother's family comes from a small town in Bengal. It's called Kollani, which
[Guest]: is it's further out from Kolkata. And I was sent to Kollani for essentially summer holidays
[Guest]: so that, you know, my parents could have some break, a little bit of time to themselves.
[Guest]: And I used to spend a lot of time with my grandmother and my grandfather. And I think
[Guest]: a lot of my reading habits, in fact, particularly came from my grandmum. She's really someone
[Guest]: who encouraged me to read and she was an avid reader. She used to read Bengali literature,
[Guest]: but she was an avid reader and she would suggest lots of things to me. And there was a cinema
[Guest]: hall which still exists. And their house was right opposite the railway station of Kollani.
[Guest]: You could see it. It was so exciting for me because I would go there and I would spend
[Guest]: all my time staring at these trains just going in and out and the people in them. And I used
[Guest]: to write, make notes then as well about what I was seeing. And I was just trying to capture,
[Guest]: I think, what I was seeing constantly and constantly being unhappy with the way I was
[Guest]: capturing it. And there was a cinema hall next to her home and they were playing Baazigar.
[Guest]: And I think this must have been 1993 or 1994. And I went to watch Baazigar, which actually
[Guest]: I do not think is the first film anyone should be watching of Shah Rukhs because he's actively
[Guest]: harming women, killing them, putting them in suitcases, all kinds of terrible things
[Guest]: are happening. But I loved it. I have to just confess, I mean, I realise I'm saying something
[Guest]: that won't be politically correct, but I know that it's actually true for so many fans,
[Guest]: female fans who may feel uncomfortable with the things that he was doing. When we saw
[Guest]: him in that film, there was something about the charge of desperation, revenge, wanting
[Guest]: to sort of make a point just who he was, the way he looked, all of that. I just loved it.
[Guest]: It was just love at first sight. And I think after that, I started following up just on
[Guest]: his... Each time we had a film out, I would try and watch it. But to be honest, my parents
[Guest]: weren't particularly keen that I go and start watching his films, especially these films.
[Guest]: And they found it a bit perplexing. And this, as you can tell from the book, is actually
[Guest]: very common with a lot of upper middle class and elite, you know, English speaking fans.
[Guest]: The parents were a bit confused as to why these young girls were suddenly connecting
[Guest]: with a man who was not a particularly ideal figure at that time. Right. And I saw DDLJ
[Guest]: with my parents in 1995. And that completely then was just, you know, I was bowled over
[Guest]: and who wasn't? I mean, it's just now so trite to say that I think the country fell in love
[Guest]: with him at that point. You didn't Amit, but the country did. And we'll talk about that.
[Guest]: And after that, Amit, actually what I remember of him the most is that when I was a latchkey
[Guest]: kid and I think we're a meagre minority in India still, you know, people whose both their
[Guest]: parents are working, because I think in the book, as you know, most women don't work in
[Guest]: the country. My mother was working, my father was working. So I'd come back home and I just
[Guest]: let myself into the house. And satellite TV had now emerged. And Mr. Khan started doing
[Guest]: all these interviews. Suddenly, you know, there was an interview on Sony, I still remember
[Guest]: with Farida Jalal, I think, or, you know, various others. And I used to watch these
[Guest]: interviews. And somehow, I think it was the interviews that really, I connected with the
[Guest]: person I saw in those interactions. And to me, he just captured this, this idea of feeling
[Guest]: left out, but then also trying to make it there was something about what how he was
[Guest]: presenting himself. And a fan was born at that stage. I mean, I think I loved imagery
[Guest]: and DDLJ and Baazigar and all of that, I won't deny it. But I think it was the interviews
[Guest]: that really set me off on this path of being a nutty fan that I still continue to be well
[Guest]: into my late 30s. I wouldn't say though that Mr. Khan was a very integral part of my childhood
[Guest]: or teenage years. I mean, he was there and I watched him. But I think it was only after
[Guest]: I became I think, in my 20s, where I started rediscovering some of the old films again.
[Guest]: And particularly through the course of the book, I think actually my fandom for him has
[Guest]: been enriched because of just the way I've heard different people talk about him. But
[Guest]: I saw him, I think it was that early 90s phase. And it was he was he was like a friend, he
[Guest]: was someone who would just sort of see on TV, and he was giving you guidance about how
[Guest]: to live life. And I remember that very well. And I think that helped with all the competition
[Guest]: and just the anxiety of just what will my job be? What will my life be like? He was
[Guest]: just a diversion from that. And that helped. But I think my, my, my fandom, I think has
[Guest]: now has been burnished in a way well into my late 30s, that I don't think it was even
[Guest]: in my teenage years or my, you know, when I was a kid.
[Amit Varma]: So isn't Bhajigarh the film with that song, Kitabi Bahut Si Pari Hogi Tumne? And you were
[Guest]: a reader.
[Guest]: That's right. Exactly. Exactly. Exactly.
[Guest]: Pining for a man who would throw you off the roof.
[Guest]: Yeah, but by God, you know, Amit, now, when I look at that film, and I watched it recently,
[Guest]: I really I mean, I was wondering what was the younger version of me number one doing
[Guest]: watching that film? Now, I don't think we live in a world where they let a kid, you
[Guest]: know, I think I must have been 12 or something, what to watch that movie. And, you know, and
[Guest]: then the other thing I was, I was watching, I was thinking, God, filmmaking was so innocent
[Guest]: back then as well. Because while he's doing all these terrible things, there was this
[Guest]: way in which these films were made as if it was so matter of fact, there was no, there
[Guest]: was no code to try and hide the fact that he was just a terrible person in parts of
[Guest]: the film. And yet you could feel that he he drew some empathy out of you. And yet it was
[Guest]: done without any, you know, it wasn't, it was just a very simple way of telling a story,
[Guest]: which I just doubt you'd see now. And my God was those outfits he was wearing, which were
[Guest]: just those oversized blazers. And then in the song and dance, there's some strange,
[Guest]: you know, outfits going on. Those films, I mean, they'll never be made again. And I think
[Guest]: that part that partly makes me sad. But partly, I'm also amused at the fact that how far you
[Guest]: know, the is a very simple era, I think, in even telling a very difficult story, but it's
[Guest]: just told in this, you know, it's a potboiler. But if you look at the story, it's actually
[Guest]: quite, it's quite dangerous. And it's quite complex for what it's trying to do. And yet
[Guest]: it's told in this really simple way.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, if you look at films as a modern mythology, you know, looking back, if you
[Amit Varma]: just look at all our myths, all our great epics, the people we are supposed to sympathize
[Amit Varma]: with do some pretty terrible things. Exactly. But it is kind of understood that you just
[Amit Varma]: go along with them, you're there with them. So here's my question. You've mentioned about
[Amit Varma]: how you like to watch, you like to observe other people. You also were keenly aware of
[Amit Varma]: differences, I guess, in the sense that you could see what the Afghan refugees went through.
[Amit Varma]: So in a sense, you had an extra layer of awareness that people within that typical bubble, your
[Amit Varma]: peers might have been a part of they weren't aware of. At what point did you start becoming
[Amit Varma]: self aware? Because one of the things I loved about the book was a very personal way in
[Amit Varma]: which you start which is so unvarnished, and so self aware, and you know, brutal with yourself.
[Amit Varma]: And when I think of my own self awareness, I don't think I was at all self aware in my
[Amit Varma]: teens or into adulthood, right? It's only after a certain period of time that you actually
[Amit Varma]: start thinking about stuff in that way you take that step out of yourself and look that
[Amit Varma]: so were you also sort of watching yourself like it? You just mentioned that you can't
[Amit Varma]: imagine why you watch Bazigar as a 12 year old to begin with, right? So you're looking
[Amit Varma]: back on your old self and you're reflecting on that. Is that something that came to you
[Amit Varma]: naturally because, you know, you read a lot, you wanted to write, obviously, you were a
[Amit Varma]: watcher. So were you also watching yourself? Tell me a little bit about that process where
[Amit Varma]: you begin to be able to see yourself because I'm sure that there are defensive reactions
[Amit Varma]: which stop us from doing that. Because you won't like what you see.
[Guest]: Yeah. In fact, a dear friend of mine recently told me that, you know, it's amazing that
[Guest]: technologies so many of us use to just hide from ourselves, right? We're constantly hiding
[Guest]: from ourselves. I was hiding from myself. Absolutely. And in fact, the book, the reason
[Guest]: I write personally, is that the book became a way for me to actually not hide anymore.
[Guest]: I'm very transparent about it. I think in the way I write it, it sounds self indulgent.
[Guest]: But my hope is because the book is actually about the stories of others. The self indulgence
[Guest]: is balanced out with the fact that this is actually a story of just women in the country
[Guest]: and society, as you said, Amit. But for me, I think I really entered that path of self
[Guest]: awareness through feminism. And what I mean by that, Amit, is that in 2004, 2005, I was
[Guest]: studying economics. I was studying development studies. And at that time, I'd taken a bunch
[Guest]: of courses on gender and economics. And there were these wonderful books by people like
[Guest]: Naila Kabir. There's a book called Power to Choose, which actually, to me, was the first.
[Guest]: For those who don't know, Naila Kabir is a revered feminist economist. She was the head
[Guest]: of the International Association of Feminist Economists for a while, a woman from Bangladesh
[Guest]: who wrote about what starts to happen when young Bangladeshi women start making money
[Guest]: in export zones in their country. And instead of taking a very macro picture, she started
[Guest]: going into people's homes and using economic theory to understand, well, how do the incentives
[Guest]: of behavior within families, love affairs, relationships start to change? And I'd always
[Guest]: been someone who was very moved, it sounds odd, but very moved by the language of economics.
[Guest]: So the language of taxes, incentives, I think, where many of us see chaos, economists tend
[Guest]: to be able to see some frameworks. And I find that terribly moving, actually, not just illuminating,
[Guest]: but I find it the language is something that really, I really enjoy it. It's to me, it's
[Guest]: like seeing a painting that moves you. And I read these books, and I devoured them. So
[Guest]: I read Naila Kabir, I read every paper she wrote, and she's definitely my, you know,
[Guest]: one of my heroes. At that time, I also started reading Marilyn Waring, these are, you know,
[Guest]: founding texts of feminist economics. And in these books, I started to realize that
[Guest]: the way I was behaving in my day to day interactions with men, with my mother, with my best friend,
[Guest]: is so deeply structurally coded by what women's experiences and women's expectations should
[Guest]: be of society and the economy within it. And I think it was that reading and those experiences
[Guest]: as a student, with feminist texts that really pushed me into sort of thinking a lot more
[Guest]: carefully about how I was behaving and my modes of behavior. And so I think it started
[Guest]: there. And then I had a bunch of terrible love affairs, one of which I talk about in
[Guest]: the book quite, quite transparently. And nothing, I think, triggers more self reflection than
[Guest]: heartbreak, right, of any kind. And I think that can be of any form. But I think for women,
[Guest]: particularly heartbreak in the area of love and intimacy tends to be very potent because
[Guest]: women are socialized into believing that loving is what you're supposed to do, right? Love
[Guest]: is so fundamental to a female life because the economy and the world outside is supposed
[Guest]: to be for men and the intimacy and the interior world is supposed to be for women. So women
[Guest]: have to secure love. And so when you don't secure love or the love that you think you've
[Guest]: secured suddenly vanishes, you are left asking a lot of questions about why did I choose
[Guest]: this path? What was the dynamic between me and this person? And this was, I think, Amit
[Guest]: around 2013. And by then, actually, the idea of the book has somewhat germinated already
[Guest]: because I was interviewing people in the past, but I had a very different idea what the book
[Guest]: would be at that time. But I think it was around that 2013 period where along with,
[Guest]: I think, all the sort of early feminist texts that I had read, compounded with this heartbreak,
[Guest]: I then started reading women, largely actually American women, funnily enough, whose memoirs
[Guest]: I just found incredibly moving. I was reading Vivian Gornick and I was reading Emily Witt.
[Guest]: If anyone ever just wants to understand, I don't know, I think there's something really
[Guest]: beautiful particularly about the way Vivian Gornick, I call her the first lady of the
[Guest]: contemporary memoir. And there was something about the way she was writing and reflecting
[Guest]: on her own experiences. And this book that I read was when she was in her 60s. And I
[Guest]: realized one of the things she wrote in the book was keeping oneself company is one of
[Guest]: the hardest things that you will ever have to do. And I realized at that point, it was
[Guest]: this eureka moment for me when I was reading her writing, and at the same time dealing
[Guest]: with my own heartbreak and you know what was happening in my life in Delhi, that I started
[Guest]: to realize that I was behaving in ways that were partly were predictable, because I think
[Guest]: I didn't want to keep myself company. It was almost, you know, textbook escapism, right?
[Guest]: So you escape into torrid, complicated love affairs, because you don't really want to
[Guest]: do the business of just being with yourself and sitting with yourself and being at peace
[Guest]: with who you are. You want to just sort of run away from all of that. And in a way, and
[Guest]: each time I try and run away, I just come back because you know, there's that great
[Guest]: line and wherever you are, you are always there. And I, I think it was that heartbreak
[Guest]: along with all the reading I was doing that pushed me to be, I don't think I'm fully self
[Guest]: aware yet. I don't I think this is like a practice for all of us. But it pushed me to
[Guest]: think much more carefully about how structures, incentives, status, taxes, all these things
[Guest]: were shaping the way I was behaving. And I think that finds itself in the page. What
[Guest]: I will also say, Amit, is that I think the book is a I think I'm far more self aware
[Guest]: in the book than I probably am in person, if that makes sense. I think writing allows
[Guest]: you that space, right? Because then you can be liberated of even having to perform a certain
[Guest]: way, even right now, when I'm with you, you know, there's a there's a performance here.
[Guest]: And when you're writing, I wrote, not to perform, but to liberate myself from performing, I
[Guest]: do know that there is writing that sometimes does the opposite, which can also be very
[Guest]: beautiful. I mean, that has its own, you know, balance, and it means something. But for me,
[Guest]: I wrote in a somewhat open hearted way, because I wanted to escape to me writing and reading
[Guest]: is the place where I've escaped that performance art of, you know, being a certain kind of
[Guest]: person in Delhi. And the last thing I will say, and probably we'll get into it more is
[Guest]: I think that Delhi is a city in particular, and the way it's set up, it guarantees unlike
[Guest]: a I really believe unlike a Mumbai or unlike a Kolkata, definitely not like a Bangalore,
[Guest]: there is something particular about Delhi, that just gets people to put on this farce
[Guest]: of who you are, much, much more. And I'm yet to understand it, maybe my next book or whatever
[Guest]: I try and do, we'll delve into that I try and attack it a bit in this book. I don't
[Guest]: think I've understood it enough. I don't think I want to glibly dismiss it as always because
[Guest]: it's the capital and there's power play and all of that. I don't think it's that I don't
[Guest]: think it's just because it's a city of power. There is something about opportunity and the
[Guest]: way opportunities mediated in Delhi, the way network wealth in a way works in Delhi, that
[Guest]: everyone then starts to behave in ways, which almost dissents, there is no incentive in
[Guest]: Delhi to be self aware, because you're always playing this game within a certain milieu.
[Guest]: And I think the book was a place for me to escape from that. And then if I'm able to
[Guest]: actually practice that level of self awareness in real life, one can only hope and I'm a
[Guest]: work in progress. But thank you for noticing that it that's, it's nice to hear.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, what do you say of Delhi always having to be performative, always playing
[Amit Varma]: a game, one that is at some level true of everything. I mean, you're not just performing
[Amit Varma]: for me, you're also performing for yourself, right? Yeah. And specifically what you said
[Amit Varma]: about Delhi could also be true of South Bombay and, you know, the various other little parts
[Amit Varma]: of the country, a couple of things like one reason I really what elevates this book for
[Amit Varma]: me beyond what I expected is that it is not just a project, it is your project, the personal
[Amit Varma]: is very much part of it, which is one of the things I really enjoyed about it, because
[Amit Varma]: then you know that the quest is real. And and you can see where it's coming from the
[Amit Varma]: way it cuts across. The other thing that strikes me and this is this is a very interesting
[Amit Varma]: sort of mix of two different aspects, which many people would think are contradictory,
[Amit Varma]: but which should actually be seen together. And one of them is that you're embracing the
[Amit Varma]: messiness of real life. People are complex, you're acknowledging those complexities, you're
[Amit Varma]: not really passing judgment, you're vicious about certain kinds of people. And we'll discuss
[Amit Varma]: those kinds of people. But on these individuals, you're not really passing judgment, you're
[Amit Varma]: incredibly empathetic. And that's one aspect of it. Yeah. And that's something that you'd
[Amit Varma]: expect, say, from literature. And the other aspect of it is, like earlier, you spoke about
[Amit Varma]: being moved by mathematics. And I get that I really do. Yeah. When when there's a beautiful,
[Amit Varma]: elegant sort of expression of a deep truth, it hits you in a visceral way, right? Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And I see that aspect also, because running through this is also you know, you're an economist,
[Amit Varma]: there is a fair amount of data in this book, though, in a very reader friendly way. And
[Amit Varma]: there is also to some extent, that clinical gaze that you know, this is a data, this also
[Amit Varma]: shows a kind of reality. So what you're doing is, you're bringing together these two pictures
[Amit Varma]: of reality, both of which are equally valid, but most people will focus on one. So often,
[Amit Varma]: you'll see economists who will give you a bunch of numbers, but they don't come alive,
[Amit Varma]: they're not vivid, they may be the truth. And equally, you will have people paint you
[Amit Varma]: stories of lives, human struggles and so on. But you don't see a larger picture. And that's
[Amit Varma]: also the truth, right? And you've kind of brought these together. And I want to actually
[Amit Varma]: ask you about these two aspects separately before we get to how they come together. And
[Amit Varma]: I want to start with the literature aspect. Like you said, you read a lot, you were watching,
[Amit Varma]: you would sit by the railway station and write little stories, I presume, of what you saw,
[Amit Varma]: which is similar to something I used to do back in the day. And it's such a writer's
[Amit Varma]: habit. So clearly, there is a storyteller, someone wanting to be a storyteller within
[Amit Varma]: that, right? So tell me a little bit about that aspect of it. What kind of books did
[Amit Varma]: you read? What kind of books did you like? What really moved you? You know, was there
[Amit Varma]: something which made you say that, I want to do, I want to write like this. So these
[Guest]: are the kind of stories I want to tell.
[Guest]: Yeah, Amit, you know, firstly, I have to say, I thought of myself as a reader, more than
[Guest]: a writer. In fact, I didn't even know that I had this book in me. It reached Shruti Devi,
[Guest]: who's my agent, but she's really not my agent. She's my guide in this book. And I think she
[Guest]: saw the book as a writing text, because for me, it was just a bunch of things that I had.
[Guest]: I think a lot of us do this, right? We just make notes. These were diary entry notes.
[Guest]: I didn't particularly know that they were lyrical. There was a way I was writing and
[Guest]: I wrote it and I somehow thought with some grand fit of confidence that I would put it
[Guest]: all together. And so I've actually always seen myself and I think still see myself as
[Guest]: a reader, more than a writer. And the books that I absolutely love, you know, that there
[Guest]: are sort of two genres there. One is, I think I hinted at this sort of large genre, particularly,
[Guest]: I think a lot of women writing what we would call confessional style writing, which tends
[Guest]: to get dismissed at a point, you know, I'm thinking of Kamala Das in India, I'm thinking
[Guest]: of, as I said, Vivian Gornick before, I'm thinking of Deborah Levy, I'm thinking of
[Guest]: a lot of women who wrote about themselves, but it was never this self indulgent trite,
[Guest]: right? It was, it was actually a very rigorous, disciplined look at life entering the world
[Guest]: through your own experiences, but in a way you're commenting on the world. And you're
[Guest]: just situating yourself very honestly. And to me, these books in particular book called
[Guest]: Odd Woman in the City by Vivian Gornick was, for me, just eye opening and what writing
[Guest]: could do. It just just changed the way I was thinking of text. And I was one of those people
[Guest]: who thought memoir and all of this was sort of, you know, again, as I said, just somewhat
[Guest]: narcissistic effort to just dwell on yourself and make even, you know, really banal things
[Guest]: seem lofty, but it really wasn't. And I think I read these women and I realised that there
[Guest]: was a way to situate yourself in larger structural forces that were very important. There was
[Guest]: Bell Hooks, who recently sadly passed away. And her books, again, just her books were
[Guest]: a bit different because they were much more theoretical. They were essentially, in a way,
[Guest]: they were prescriptive somewhat, they were telling you how to live. But I found them
[Guest]: very instructive in, again, thinking about all these very everyday feelings we have feeling
[Guest]: unloved, feeling lonely, feeling cut up, short changed, all of us deal with these negative
[Guest]: feelings. And what I loved about these books was that they were telling you that these
[Guest]: negative feelings, well, number one, you were not alone in them, which I think is the function
[Guest]: of art. But the other was that they were telling you, unlike other kinds of art, they were
[Guest]: actually telling you that there's a structural reason why you seem to be persisting with
[Guest]: these feelings. And you seem to also always be dwelling on these feelings. And I realised
[Guest]: that there was a way to write about intimacy then, which would very beautifully connect
[Guest]: with the structures of the economy. Suddenly, I think the notes that I had kept from 2006
[Guest]: with all these fans that I had interviewed, these women, it all just came alive around
[Guest]: the time that I was reading these different women's books. So there's, I think, a lot
[Guest]: of the feminist memoir literature, and the feminist literature around love, in particular
[Guest]: bell hooks and so on and so forth. The other genre that I was reading, Amit, is economics.
[Guest]: And here, I have to sort of say that the book still, I think I read Abhijit Banerjee's
[Guest]: and Asadu Flow's Poor Economics. There was essentially just, you know, there was Exit
[Guest]: Voice and Loyalty, which was one of my favourite books. But all of these books were very heavy
[Guest]: handed in the way that they were structured, because they were still technical economists
[Guest]: writing in that language. And it's a beautiful language. But I felt that I was reading those
[Guest]: books, I was reading a lot of academic work on contract theory, on incentives, on taxes,
[Guest]: as I mentioned, microeconomics of the household. So there's a book by her edited by Haddad
[Guest]: and Hodinath, which is on intra household bargaining power. It's extremely droll and
[Guest]: very technical, but I was reading it along with reading Kamala Das talking about her
[Guest]: personal life. And what's interesting is you start to realise when you're reading these
[Guest]: different genres together, I think somehow for me, they just came together because I
[Guest]: realised and this is something I'm trying to do in the book is I'm trying to tell you
[Guest]: that the way you feel in your family has something to do with the way you are treated in the
[Guest]: labour market. And the way you're treated in the labour market has everything to do
[Guest]: with the way your intimate relationships are treating you. And this was a link between
[Guest]: these two genres of reading that hadn't really been made, I felt in Indian writing, and at
[Guest]: least in nonfiction, I think it was, it was tried, but but I felt this was my book was
[Guest]: just an effort to push that along. And I also at this point, the other book that really,
[Guest]: I think, has shaped the way I think about writing is there's a book by Eric Fromm called
[Guest]: The Art of Loving. And I think it's a must read for everyone, only because it's a slim
[Guest]: book. He was a psychotherapist, but also a philosopher, social philosopher. And he essentially
[Guest]: was telling us that love is not, you know, we now live in a world within, you know, sort
[Guest]: of capitalist modes of production that we've all started to believe love is power, that
[Guest]: if you have power over someone, then they love you, right? If you can get them to do
[Guest]: something, if they can get them to pick you, if you can get them to have sex with you,
[Guest]: there's this always getting and having, exactly, it's very transactional. And he, I think,
[Guest]: you know, way before this became trendy to talk about recently on Twitter, he was telling
[Guest]: us that love is an art, love requires, you have to sort of think of it not as a self
[Guest]: maximising endeavour, but actually an act of generosity. And somehow, when I was reading
[Guest]: all these, all these writers, and most of them, actually, I recognise many of them are
[Guest]: not fiction writers per se, many of this is, it's memoir, it's philosophy, it's works of
[Guest]: economics, some of it is somewhat academic. But I think these were the books and papers
[Guest]: that really pushed me to think about writing about seemingly banal things, but with a fair
[Guest]: amount of empathy. And then the last thing I will say is, I've been obsessed with this
[Guest]: writer Nancy Mitford for the longest time, she just, if you if you pick up, you know,
[Guest]: any amount of me trying to be sardonic, in the book, I think it owes tremendous debt
[Guest]: to me reading her. And I think that The Pursuit of Love, you know, just all these books, because
[Guest]: she was writing about these extremely wicked people, they were self indulgent, self involved,
[Guest]: self obsessed. And yet you loved them, because she wrote about them in this deep sense of
[Guest]: empathy. And she wrote about them in this extremely interesting stylistic way where
[Guest]: you would recognize what they were doing was so narcissistic, and yet you understood them
[Guest]: and you understood where they came from. And I think that really had a very significant
[Guest]: impact on at least the way I think about writing women in particular, because I think she was
[Guest]: able to do that much more with women per se, than men. And I think that this was sort of
[Guest]: the broad sets of, you know, influences and thinking about just literature and writing.
[Guest]: When it comes to Indian letters, I read, I read Hindi, I love Hindi literature, and,
[Guest]: and Srilal Shukla to me is, I just, I think, because I was, I was, you know, when you have
[Guest]: that choice, Amit, between Sanskrit and Hindi, I chosen to study Hindi, you know, when you
[Guest]: have that before your board exams, you choose. And I'm so glad because I just, you know,
[Guest]: Premchand, Srilal Shukla, these are, these are classics. And I realized it's again, tried
[Guest]: to mention, but particularly Mr. Shukla, because, you know, to me, the way he was writing about
[Guest]: government, the way he was writing about what the emerging middle class even in his time
[Guest]: was, he wrote satire. And, you know, one of my favorite stories that he did is called
[Guest]: Mummy G's Donkey. And I really think everyone should read it. I think Penguin has come out
[Guest]: recently with, they've re translated and it's out. And essentially what he's trying, it's
[Guest]: a story actually about someone's son, who they call a donkey. And the English translation
[Guest]: is extremely fantastic as well. But the Hindi is just as, it's just superior, of course.
[Guest]: And I think some combination of reading Hindi satire, along with these really biting feminists
[Guest]: who were trying to write about people, I think that all of that finds its way, at least in
[Guest]: the influences that you're seeing on the page.
[Amit Varma]: Wow. And you mentioned bureaucracy, you know, there's this excellent little excerpt from
[Amit Varma]: your chapter about the accountant, where, just quote that bit, you're talking to someone,
[Amit Varma]: so you also quote her during this bit. So there's like, it's a quote within a quote.
[Amit Varma]: Relentless record keeping must be part of a young bureaucrat's oeuvre. There is no meeting
[Amit Varma]: if there are no minutes. There are no minutes if you don't take proper notes. Director Sahib
[Amit Varma]: had emphasized while staring at her breasts. Eleven months at the Secretariat have taught
[Amit Varma]: her three things, and she has taught me well. One, the Sarkar notes everything, especially
[Amit Varma]: breasts. Two, to avoid trouble, it is best to file and forget. Three, the most valuable
[Amit Varma]: meetings have reams of notes which say nothing. Yeah, you mentioned sardonic also. So to go
[Amit Varma]: back to that other angle of it, that you're studying economics, right? And why did you
[Amit Varma]: choose economics per se? Because it's not really a straight line from math to there
[Amit Varma]: always necessary. And you know, was it kind of happenstance? Did you have a natural interest
[Amit Varma]: on it? And where do we reach that stage where it feels interesting to you for the way it
[Amit Varma]: applies to the real world? Like one of the criticisms you've had of economists in this
[Amit Varma]: book as well is that, you know, economists like and that I lament also all the time on
[Amit Varma]: my show is that economists sometimes, you know, lose sight of the real world in the
[Amit Varma]: sense that they'll have their meta way and their frameworks of looking at everything.
[Amit Varma]: And they'll have the dry data. And somehow it doesn't connect up with real people, you
[Amit Varma]: know, and you the consequences of this can be pretty bad because you look at something
[Amit Varma]: like demonetization. And it would just make me so angry that people are talking about
[Amit Varma]: costs and benefits. And of course, there were no benefits. But the point is, even if there
[Amit Varma]: were benefits, the cost went to one set of people, yes, the benefits went to another
[Amit Varma]: set of people, there is a moral issue that the people who are suffering are real people,
[Amit Varma]: you got to get down to that level of looking at the real people and thinking about it.
[Amit Varma]: And many economists I know don't make that connection. They're trapped in the discipline.
[Amit Varma]: Everything is abstract. It is not concrete. What you do so well in this book is that you
[Amit Varma]: make it concrete. But when you started, was it like that? What was that journey like of
[Guest]: like applying what you have learned to the world is a very frustrating journey, Amit,
[Guest]: because the one community that I am a part of, I don't have a PhD in economics, but I'm
[Guest]: trained in economics. And I'm what we call a jobbing economist. So you know, economics
[Guest]: is is my job. I'm a part of the community. But I absolutely loathe what is happening
[Guest]: in the way economists engage with the real world. And what I mean by that is even if
[Guest]: you look right now at the COVID crisis, and I'll come to the book in a second. But if
[Guest]: you look at the COVID crisis, it's fascinating to me that some of the best economists in
[Guest]: the world who happen to be South Asian, Indian, have come out time and time and again and
[Guest]: said we need a livelihood stimulus. And it needs to have an income support package. There
[Guest]: are very sensible reasons to do it. And there are feasible solutions to do so. They have
[Guest]: been saying this in op eds, they've written books, they've appeared on television shows,
[Guest]: podcasts, you name it, and the best including Nobel laureates, ex you know, RBI governors,
[Guest]: all of that. And yet, no one is listening. There is this complete paralysis and first
[Guest]: just picking up what the community is saying. And I think part of the problem is that over
[Guest]: the years, and I think you're absolutely right in picking up demonetization as an example
[Guest]: of this, because to me, it is I fully agree with you, by the way, that to me, it is the
[Amit Varma]: dividing line between whether I can even talk to you or not, to be perfectly honest.
[Amit Varma]: It's a litmus test.
[Guest]: And for me, when I look at the way, even during the farm laws, this really unemotional,
[Guest]: really disengaged way, even most technocratic economists would talk about what's happening.
[Guest]: Immediately, then you know that it's already just become something that, you know, experts
[Guest]: in the world of economics are essentially now brought out to essentially fill in TV,
[Guest]: you know, sort of infotainment gap. So there are debates and there's it's become that but
[Guest]: the ability to actually translate some of the really important insights into the real
[Guest]: world, I think is heavily compromised. And I think there are two reasons for that.
[Guest]: And I think this speaks to my frustration, which has found its way in the book.
[Guest]: I think one is Danny Roderick had a set of fabulous tweets, it's very rare that I say
[Guest]: someone had fabulous tweets, but he actually had a set of fabulous tweets, where he basically,
[Guest]: I'm going to say maybe two years ago, three years ago, he essentially said that academic
[Guest]: economics, academia, academic economists, especially those trained in elite universities
[Guest]: elite universities in the US in particular, tend to become socialized in what he calls,
[Guest]: you know, this jerk quotient, he actually he called it the jerk quotient. And he said that
[Guest]: you are taught to be always with your elbows out the notion of collaboration, understanding,
[Guest]: let alone within your own peers, but with other disciplines, with civil society with activists
[Guest]: is heavily frowned on, because you need to produce a paper, there is brutal competition in the way
[Guest]: these departments work. And and what he was trying to say, very sensibly, I thought was that then
[Guest]: those modes of competition and lack of collaboration just become imprinted on you.
[Guest]: So even though you've left the department, and you may do very well for yourself,
[Guest]: when you're engaging with what you and I would call the real world, you're constantly engaging
[Guest]: with them with still that mindset. So people are only useful to you if they have a data set to
[Guest]: give you, if they have grant funding to give you if you if they can help you with your brand or
[Guest]: status. And they can ideally put you on some kind of panel with a politician or someone who probably
[Guest]: help you run an RCT or something like that. There are very few economists and to me the gold
[Guest]: standard in this is Professor Jean Drez. I don't think there is anyone who sort of embodies this,
[Guest]: which is that he went out to say you need to keep all research people centric. And he is,
[Guest]: you know, as much activist as economists. And you know, it's not that the rigor of what he's doing
[Guest]: has ever been sacrificed. But the way it is practiced, I think is just remarkable. I don't
[Guest]: think I would not be able to do it. I think the kinds of sacrifices in the way he lives his life,
[Guest]: it would be very difficult for me to do so. But I really think that those are the kinds of stories
[Guest]: about professional academia or and you need to talk about and and yet we don't see that right,
[Guest]: like we see a very different kind of rock star worship, which is completely associated with
[Guest]: status. So I think part of the problem is the real world is not interesting, because unless it
[Guest]: accrues status in your professional ambitions, good luck, that's one. And the second I think,
[Guest]: Amit, is that somewhere in all of this, and I think this is something I really believe has a lot
[Guest]: to do with the caste system as well, because education is so heavily mediated through,
[Guest]: you know, upper caste, it's very Brahminical pursuit, right? And I say this, bearing a Brahmin
[Guest]: surname, and I'm acutely conscious of that. But I do think what's happened is that when men,
[Guest]: particularly men, and I think I make fun of them quite a bit in the book, and I'm sure it'll be
[Guest]: interesting seeing the reactions that come through. When men have these really posh degrees,
[Guest]: it's almost you know, the character in a book said to me that, you know, you give a man
[Guest]: a degree and a good job, and then he just thinks he's God. And there is this constant
[Guest]: patronizing of other fields, of other ways of looking, of people who don't have the same
[Guest]: prestige as you. And I, you know, I work in social protection, I work in social policy,
[Guest]: and I can tell you, Amit, if you're a social worker now, or you're a non-techie, non-PhD,
[Guest]: who happens to actually work every day in the program management of a livelihoods program,
[Guest]: or the public distribution system, no one will take you seriously. This group will constantly,
[Guest]: essentially, you will be expected to run through hoops of trying to gain legitimacy for your voice.
[Guest]: And there is such caste pride in the profession, I think, particularly amongst its men. I actually
[Guest]: think the women in the profession, it's a very small pool of women. I do think it operates
[Guest]: differently because they're extremely aware of what it feels like to be a marginalized
[Guest]: community within the profession. And I think my book was actually honestly a way for me to voice
[Guest]: my frustration with this. There's this game that economists, young economists, are playing. I
[Guest]: actually don't think established economists are not playing that game anymore, because it's very
[Guest]: different for them. They operate in a very different reality. But young economists are
[Guest]: constantly being trained to look at the real world only from the perspective of their research
[Guest]: projects. And that's fine. But surely there has to be more than that. And to me, one of the things
[Guest]: that we're risking in that is, I say this in the book, that the economy actually has a very rich
[Guest]: ethical and emotional life. The economy is a feeling being. It is not just a bunch of soulless
[Guest]: transactions. The stock market is soulless. The economy is not the stock market. The economy is
[Guest]: all our relationships, you and me drinking our coffees here, our moods, our predilections.
[Guest]: They find their way into the numbers on consumption, growth, jobs. And there is tremendous
[Guest]: sentiment that the economy holds. And the best writing on the economy has always captured those
[Guest]: sentiments, be it a Jean Drez, be it an Abhijit Banerjee. And I felt that I was trying to write
[Guest]: a very different book. It was not, you know, as you say, this is a book on gender and society,
[Guest]: and the economy shapes that. But I was very keen to tell a story about women's employment from the
[Guest]: perspective of feeling. What did it feel like? Because we all know that graph, Amit, that graph
[Guest]: from 2004 to 2017, sharp drop in female employment. And I think we've all grown inured to it, right?
[Guest]: And a lot of people even said this about death statistics during the pandemic, sadly.
[Guest]: And I wanted the reader to walk away from the book and realize the tears, the frustrations,
[Guest]: the loneliness of that sharp drop, but that you see in that graph. And in fact, the book starts
[Guest]: with that graph. It's right up on the first page. And at the end, I have a set of data annextures,
[Guest]: and I quote someone, and actually, nobody knows who wrote, who said this, but they say it's Bertrand
[Guest]: Russell, which is, it is the mark of a civilized man to look at a column of numbers and weep.
[Guest]: And I think we should all be weeping when, my hope actually is that by the time you reach those
[Guest]: numbers, you are weeping, because there is, it's brutal what's happening with that sharp drop in
[Guest]: with that sharp drop in job rates for women. And yet economists, I mean, I think there's some
[Guest]: economists who are obviously committed to it. But I don't think we are committed to telling the
[Guest]: stories behind the statistics. And I think if you understand the statistics well enough, then only
[Guest]: will you be able to tell those stories well, and I was privileged to at least have that kind of
[Guest]: background to be able to mirror the two together and marry them. And the book is essentially an
[Guest]: effort in that direction. But I will say one thing that I also think that this is a larger problem
[Guest]: when you start to you know, the book is also is is a hat tip to the female gaze. And I like to
[Guest]: believe it's actually without sounding too lofty and full of myself, maybe I will, but I think it's
[Guest]: the it's the female gaze towards the economy. Because if women start to look at the economy,
[Guest]: I was very curious, what does that look like? And in fact, I think the stories over the 15 years
[Guest]: that I followed all these women, they're actually telling me what when they look at the economy,
[Guest]: what are they seeing, they're seeing the home because the home remains their principal productive
[Guest]: workplace. It is not the factories and fields. And yet, when you look at the conversation amongst
[Guest]: technocrats and policymakers, the home is yet to be acknowledged as a productive workplace,
[Guest]: because if it were then conversations and policy around tenure security around domestic
[Guest]: infrastructure around water would be radically different around reproductive health as well.
[Guest]: And we don't spend enough in these areas and the quality of spending remains poor because
[Guest]: there's a very different gaze. I think the conversation on the economy is still dominated,
[Guest]: I won't say by men, but I think by masculine gaze, because then many of us who even women
[Guest]: who have been trained in a way of thinking, you inherit that kind of technical way of thinking,
[Guest]: without recognizing that the home actually is the principal workplace for half the population.
[Guest]: And we don't talk about that. The second thing you realize when women start to look at the economy
[Guest]: is that notions of love of care of social relationships, become fulcrums and levers
[Guest]: of any kind of change in the economy. That's actually where incentives and taxes come into
[Guest]: play. And in the book, I give people a flavor drawing on work of Sendhil Mullainathan,
[Guest]: because he has this wonderful framework, he calls it a hidden tax. And he says that
[Guest]: anytime people start to do things that social scripts really don't want them to do,
[Guest]: interpersonally, we start taxing people making them feel unloved. And in the book,
[Guest]: the stories are women who want to just earn their own money, and they want to spend it,
[Guest]: it sounds really simple. It's incredibly complex thing to do. I think the book gives you a flavor
[Guest]: of that. And they also happen to have a favorite actor, and it's their own way of asserting their
[Guest]: selfhood. And something as simple as that suddenly lovers, boyfriends, fathers, mothers,
[Guest]: in laws, their own friends. This is not a male female issue. It's cross gender.
[Guest]: People start taxing these women for Oh, how dare you want to stand on your own two feet? How dare
[Guest]: you want to do things that are moving away from what is conformist and it makes us comfortable,
[Guest]: you know, you as a mother or you as just a caregiver. And I realized that the female
[Guest]: gaze of the economy would focus on those things. Because many of the women in the book will say
[Guest]: this, and I think you've read it, but they will say that we don't work. Because we know if we
[Guest]: start to work more number of hours, our loved ones will feel neglected. And so love as a lever
[Guest]: in the way women are participating in the economy becomes very clear when you start to ask the
[Guest]: questions in a different way. And I don't think that's currently the way economists are thinking
[Guest]: about the economy. And I think it's shifting. I think as more as feminist economics as a field
[Guest]: starts to grow, I think things will change. And the notion of obviously, I think there's been a
[Guest]: lot of lip service paid to valuing unpaid care work. And we know that it's a huge contribution
[Guest]: to the economy, the workforce would not be sustained. And I say this in the book that
[Guest]: the economy, the surface of it is a bunch of men trading money. But behind that is the invisible
[Guest]: love and care that women provide that allows for these men to trade labor and money. And right now
[Guest]: the economy works in such a way that women earn love and men earn money. And the earning money
[Guest]: is actually much easier than earning love. And the labor of what women are doing in the economy
[Guest]: is just continues to be disregarded. I don't know, there are several solutions about what that could
[Guest]: look like an economy that actually values care. Fiscally, it could be very challenging. But I
[Guest]: think those are the questions to ask, especially as we emerge out of a pandemic, when we know that
[Guest]: we know that care has been absolutely central to the way we've emerged out of the pandemic,
[Guest]: be it nursing doctors, be it you know, women telling kids to wash their hands or you know,
[Guest]: wear a mask. All of that requires care. And if women are doing the giant share of care,
[Guest]: and India still continues to be bottom five when it comes to the share of men supporting care work
[Guest]: in the world. Surely, then a female gaze to the economy is a helpful thing to at least ask
[Guest]: us to think about policy very differently. And I am yet to see that shift happening. I think
[Guest]: it's happening in spaces and in some different initiatives, and I'm hopeful. But the book
[Guest]: essentially tries to tell you well, what what happens when women start to look at the economy?
[Guest]: And what does that look like? And what does that feel like? And I think the feel is the emphasis
[Amit Varma]: in the book for me. Yeah, you know, I mean, there are about 40 things in what you just said,
[Amit Varma]: which I want to double click on, which I will duly do in the course of this nine hour conversation.
[Amit Varma]: So I hope you've got your energy bars with you. But you know, my mind goes back to that cliched
[Amit Varma]: parable of the blind man and the elephant. Yeah. And all these blind men are feeling different
[Amit Varma]: parts of the elephant seeing different things. And I think society is a bit like that. It's the
[Amit Varma]: elephant. And an economist will look at one aspect of it. And a social scientist or a social worker
[Amit Varma]: will look at another aspect of it. A feminist will look at one aspect of it. And what I really
[Amit Varma]: liked about your book is that you've got multiple aspects to bear on them. So we can see some of the
[Amit Varma]: connections, some of those dots become clearer. I mean, what is really the economy? It's a subset
[Amit Varma]: of society. It's the sum total of the voluntary transactions between people, right? And that's
[Amit Varma]: one way in which you can see what's happening in society. And the other way, which is more
[Amit Varma]: nebulous and harder to put down in numbers is all of these interpersonal relationships, these social
[Amit Varma]: structures, how some of them are so oppressive, how people deal with those oppressions, the
[Amit Varma]: interior lives of the people who do that. And that's one thing I really liked about the book
[Amit Varma]: that it brings these two kind of together. And I found your quote about economists from the book,
[Amit Varma]: and I'm going to read it out because I liked so much of your book for the writing. It's delightful.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you. Often when we think of the economy, we think of it as some intimidating notion
[Amit Varma]: accessible only to a group of stuffy technocrats and Davos attendees. So precious that it can only
[Amit Varma]: be discussed and understood by finance dude bros, stock market analysts, and know it all economists.
[Amit Varma]: However, the best economists know that the economy is nothing but our modes and relationships,
[Amit Varma]: which define who produces and transacts what the economy has a rich emotional and ethical life.
[Amit Varma]: The economy is made up of the loves and losses of the women I encountered, their fandom and
[Amit Varma]: their fantasies, a set of feelings we must be able to conjure up when we look at bland data
[Amit Varma]: sheets on jobs, consumption sales, or box office collections. Those statistics represent an ocean
[Amit Varma]: of sentiment. Stop good. Beautifully said. And I love that quote, which you said is allegedly
[Amit Varma]: by Bertrand Russell. And you know, I feel like saying numbers are people too. But then some
[Amit Varma]: people in a certain party in India would no doubt create the hashtag not all numbers.
[Amit Varma]: There's a slippery slope there. It's a slippery slope. Yeah. I also want to talk a bit about
[Amit Varma]: academia. Yeah, I think I put out a tweet a couple of days back, we are recording this on
[Amit Varma]: December 17, though, it'll probably come out a long time after this. But I put out a tweet
[Amit Varma]: talking about how academia is a big circle jerk. And I've had conversations with my good friend,
[Amit Varma]: the economist Ajay Shah, who's also been on the show. And one of his laments is that so few
[Amit Varma]: economists engage with the real world in the manner in which he tries to do or you have done.
[Amit Varma]: And that, you know, the academy game has its own incentives, its own constraints, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you get into a particular department somewhere, there'll be a dominant ideology, you know,
[Amit Varma]: there'll be a certain set of research projects you can do and others that you better not venture
[Amit Varma]: into. And all of these constraints drive you down particular directions. And it just seems to be
[Amit Varma]: completely separate from the way the world works. And, and I'm just thinking aloud here, one of the
[Amit Varma]: things I've noticed in the creator economy, which I've thought a lot about and experienced is that
[Amit Varma]: gatekeepers are becoming irrelevant in the sense that in the 1990s, if I wanted to write something,
[Amit Varma]: means of production are not not available to me, I have to go to gatekeepers, I want to make a
[Amit Varma]: movie, I want to record a song, whatever I want to do, I need to go to gatekeepers. Today, over a
[Amit Varma]: period of time, it's we've evolved to a space where I think gatekeepers have are becoming irrelevant
[Amit Varma]: really fast for most creators already have, like if I was to pitch the show to some established
[Amit Varma]: company and say, I'll have four hour conversations with feminist economists, you know, I'd be laughed
[Amit Varma]: out of the room. Yeah, but it's it's happening, you know, in one of my earlier episodes, which
[Amit Varma]: is not released yet, but will be released before this one. My good friend, Chuck Gopal told me
[Amit Varma]: about this lady on Instagram called Miss Excel. And she's great at Excel. And she loves dancing
[Amit Varma]: and she loves EDM. So the she does these Instagram videos, where you have this window on top where
[Amit Varma]: there's an Excel sheet. And there are instructions there on how to do whatever. And she's dancing
[Amit Varma]: to EDM. Wow. Now, and she makes I think $100,000 a day, because she sells courses on how to teach
[Amit Varma]: Excel. She is the most successful Excel teacher in the world. Yeah, right. And no gatekeeper would
[Amit Varma]: allow that. Yeah. But within the context of the creator economy, she actually fits what I would
[Amit Varma]: say the formula is, which to me is number one, be authentic to yourself. And she knows Excel,
[Amit Varma]: and she loves dancing and EDM. Number two, be relatable. And that's it's relatable, because
[Amit Varma]: everyone wants to bet so many people want to learn Excel. And number three, create that intimate
[Amit Varma]: space where you know, your reader feels that they know you, which also she does. Now, if I
[Amit Varma]: transpose that to the context of say something like economics, which people think, okay, it's a
[Amit Varma]: dry field. It is an academic field. Sometimes there is a correlation between what happens there
[Amit Varma]: and what happens in the real world. But it's like a separate thing, right? And at the same time,
[Amit Varma]: we realized that there is a hunger among people to figure the world out. Yes, there's no question
[Amit Varma]: about this. There's a hunger among people who want to figure the world out, and no one speaking to
[Amit Varma]: them. Most academics are in their little circle jerk with their abstruse jargon, yes, with their
[Amit Varma]: predetermined mindsets, and no one speaking to them. And therefore, it seems that over time,
[Amit Varma]: do you think it is a possibility that even from within this discipline, the gatekeepers can become
[Amit Varma]: irrelevant, and they can be a way for economists to exist outside of this? Amit, in fact, I think
[Guest]: it's happening. So there are organizations like for example, Bahujan Economics. And, you know,
[Guest]: what they are doing is it's a collective of scholars who want to look at it's the Dalit
[Guest]: gaze to the economy. And it's really exciting some of the things that at least I've read,
[Guest]: and I'm really curious to learn more about what they're doing. Look at the right to food in
[Guest]: particular as a movement. And I think the the academic work that so many of the economists
[Guest]: connected with right to food have done. And honestly, Amit, the reason we have a public
[Guest]: distribution system that was able to provide food grains to 800 million people during the crisis is
[Guest]: because of the sustained work of economists who are involved in that fight in making food security
[Guest]: universal. So I think there are some phenomenal and really good examples of that. And then there
[Guest]: are limits to that, because now the same movements are trying to contend with how do you use technology
[Guest]: better? And how do you study the use of technology better as as economists on the ground? I think
[Guest]: there are two things to me that really need to change. And again, here, I will go back to
[Guest]: traditional good old economics, which is, you know, incentives and compensation, which is that
[Guest]: currently, if you look at, you know, I've done a bunch of surveys during the crisis, even before
[Guest]: I work for the World Bank, and often we need to do real time data collection to understand I work
[Guest]: on safety nets and social insurance programs, we need to run surveys to understand who's getting
[Guest]: what are people even receiving benefits. We run these surveys, the data sits and we use it for
[Guest]: our dialogue with state governments or the national government or different stakeholders.
[Guest]: But then it just sits there. And at least the one thing I'm really pleased is that the World Bank
[Guest]: as an organisation has a policy that you're supposed to open up the data, you're supposed
[Guest]: to make it available. And so other researchers and scholars can use it in whichever way they'd like.
[Guest]: And I think that as access to information and data starts to become more democratic,
[Guest]: because one of the biggest hurdles in doing what we would call real world engaged economics or
[Guest]: ground up economics in a way, is that it's really costly to collect data, it's costly to do some of
[Guest]: the things that you would want to do. I mean, and especially because you want to do them in an
[Guest]: ethical, good, rigorous way where you're protecting the people who are collecting the information as
[Guest]: well. And that's an extremely expensive enterprise. And right now, I'm sure you notice that Professor
[Guest]: Drez is, you know, there have been lots of articles back and forth between him and his
[Guest]: colleagues in CMIE about access to CMIE data as well, right? Because it is extremely expensive
[Guest]: organisations like the World Bank can access it, and there are others who can, but then there are
[Guest]: lots of young students who might be in small towns or villages who may be able to make some
[Guest]: remarkable, make that data sing in a way, but they currently don't fully have access. So I think the
[Guest]: first thing we start to need to do is the costs of access to just fundamental data, which will be
[Guest]: useful to create some of this rich information just needs to be much more democratic. And in
[Guest]: going back to your creator economy parallel, one of the beautiful things about the creator economy
[Guest]: is that some of the gatekeeping has gone because access to data has become an access to the
[Guest]: internet as well has become far more democratic, and it's just made platforms much more open.
[Guest]: I think we really need to think about things like that when it comes to data and economics. I think
[Guest]: there needs to be a big shift there. So that's one. I think the second is, if you look at again,
[Guest]: the surveys we run and what we write, often, and you're absolutely right, it's like we live in this
[Guest]: bubble where many of us write op-eds and, you know, an occasional op-ed in the Indian Express,
[Guest]: there'll be an article in EPW, but it's not really considered academic prestige, right?
[Guest]: And I remember once I was listening to Professor Raghuram Rajan at, I think it was a seminar at
[Guest]: the Kennedy School, he'd come in to talk to somebody and he said that the problem is that
[Guest]: economics departments in academia will socialize you into believing that anything other than these,
[Guest]: you know, top peer-reviewed journals is just, that's just meaningless. It's just, you know,
[Guest]: trash in a way. Well, not even trash, but sweet trash, you know, somewhat helpful, but not,
[Guest]: you know, and I think he had a very clever way he put it, which I've forgotten, but it was
[Guest]: quite interesting. And even he was saying that that needs to start to change because, in fact,
[Guest]: if you look at a lot of macroeconomic work, it's, in fact, chief economists of banks that,
[Guest]: who are producing some really fascinating analysis. It may not be academically valid,
[Guest]: it may not have legitimacy of that kind in academia, but it is extremely useful information.
[Guest]: And I think trying to create communities that reward value, recognize that work,
[Guest]: the quality of that work, it may have very different metrics of assessment.
[Guest]: I think that really needs to be amplified far more so that you create an economy of
[Guest]: prestige of its own, right? Because people do want to feel meaningful. I think human beings,
[Guest]: it's just not possible for us not to want to put something out there and not feel that
[Guest]: it's being recognized and it's being valued. And there is a competition inherently,
[Guest]: which is also healthy in a way amongst people that will just play itself out.
[Guest]: But just like, as you mentioned, Miss Excel, I think, just as what you just described,
[Guest]: you know, now there is an audience and a platform that recognizes and rewards and appreciates that
[Guest]: kind of effort. I'm yet to see that happen in more grounded economic writing or surveys,
[Guest]: analysis. I think there's some stuff that what tends to happen is even there's a crisis,
[Guest]: as we saw with the pandemic, there was such useful stuff that was coming out from different,
[Guest]: typically civil society organizations who just somehow, despite all the perils of the pandemic,
[Guest]: just were able to collect data from migrant workers, from others. And then it's right now,
[Guest]: for example, Azeem Premji University now maintains an entire database where they're
[Guest]: trying to collate all these papers and all the data. But, you know, why not create a space where,
[Guest]: you know, papers of that kind essentially can be published, can be rewarded, can be discussed.
[Guest]: Often people who are participating in this kind of knowledge production, and it is economics,
[Guest]: will never be invited to, you know, the Fashion Week for Policy Economists, right? Which is all
[Guest]: these events that you have in Delhi, curated typically by economists who live abroad and
[Guest]: they come here. And I think we need to start to think about creating spaces like that,
[Guest]: that are very different. It could be done through local think tanks. And I think
[Guest]: there has to be a way to value it. And I think if the two start to happen, we democratize access
[Guest]: to data, and incredibly so, not just saying that there's a portal and you can go access the portal,
[Guest]: but doing it in a way which actually makes it easier for people to access through local
[Guest]: organizations, online, so on and so forth. And the second is if we start to create incentives
[Guest]: of a very different recognition, a very different kind of work, and come up with a language and a
[Guest]: set of codes for that, I think that'll be really helpful as we move forward. And the third, Amit,
[Guest]: I will say this, is that, and I think my book is one little meagre attempt at this, I hate a
[Guest]: certain kind of economics writing, which assumes that the government and people with power are the
[Guest]: only audience that matters, right? So there's a kind of stuffy, terrible writing, just terrible,
[Guest]: which I just loathe where you have all these extremely powerful men, it's usually always men
[Guest]: who will write these books saying the government should do this and the government should do that
[Guest]: and it's like a list of prescriptions. And of course, the government is not listening,
[Guest]: the government is going to do what it is feasible politically and administratively to do.
[Guest]: And I think economists also need to stop writing for power. Why don't we write to explain the world
[Guest]: to ourselves and to others, to people we know? And I think it is happening. In fact, people like you
[Guest]: and even a lot of activists are trying, and Mr. Shah, Professor Shah, you mentioned, so many people
[Guest]: are trying to now write in a way where they're not really interested whether the government or
[Guest]: structures of power are listening. It's more for the general public or it could actually just be
[Guest]: for communities. This idea of the Bahujan economics group is really interesting to me
[Guest]: because suddenly the audience, it's not just for government, it's actually to understand our own
[Guest]: communities better. And if you look at the feminist economics movement, I mean, it's very
[Guest]: similar. The interest is not in just getting governments to see the value in seeing this
[Guest]: research is viable or legitimate and actionable. They are not in the business of giving advice to
[Guest]: prime ministers and chief ministers. They are in the business of completely changing the way we
[Guest]: think about the world. And that they realize is not just something powerful people can do.
[Guest]: They're interested in students and communities and the general public. And I think the more we
[Guest]: have that, and that will require some people to take risks in their careers. And I think some
[Guest]: people have. And I think the more we see that happening, I'll be more hopeful of the way
[Guest]: economics as a profession is moving. And yeah, so I'm hopeful. But I think these different things
[Guest]: need to happen. And we need to stop kowtowing to just an audience of power. I think there's a
[Guest]: larger audience out there. And then perhaps the structures of power can start to move. But
[Amit Varma]: I think it's a different game then. Yeah, I'll double down, not double click,
[Amit Varma]: but double down on a couple of the things you said, because I feel so strongly about them as well.
[Amit Varma]: And one of them is democratic access to data. Like one of my best books I've read in the last
[Amit Varma]: few years is a book called Super Forecasting by Philip Tetlock. And where, you know, one of the
[Amit Varma]: things he points out is how often experts get predictions wrong, where there is so much data
[Amit Varma]: that shows that all these experts with their fancy degrees and their Ivy League school
[Amit Varma]: professorships, they'll go on TV, they'll make predictions, they'll be wrong. While it is
[Amit Varma]: actually, you know, there are forecasting competitions and the kind of people who really
[Amit Varma]: do well in them are just self taught people who are skeptical about everything and open to changing
[Amit Varma]: their mind. And my sense is that, you know, if every data set is available to everyone,
[Amit Varma]: then somebody from God knows where without a shred of privilege, yes, can just access it
[Amit Varma]: on the internet, apply her own brain. And as you said, so well make the data sing,
[Amit Varma]: see something that others can't see, because they're coming at it differently.
[Amit Varma]: While the whole academic world will come at it from one lens.
[Guest]: Exactly. And you know, Amit, I think the reason that's so powerful is because
[Guest]: I once foolishly, I had gone to a seminar, because you know, I'm, of course, I'm such a nerd,
[Guest]: and I'm obsessed with economists. So I went to a seminar that Amartya Sen was doing. This is,
[Guest]: I think the last time he was probably in Delhi. And it was at the Habitat Center, and you know,
[Guest]: large audience, and then it was opened up to questions. Sharmila Tagore was there,
[Guest]: which is very exciting for me. It was like economics meets Bollywood. So it's so exciting.
[Amit Varma]: She's not even Bollywood, Shuttujit Rai, that's where she started.
[Guest]: I also think of her as Kashmiri Kali and all of that.
[Guest]: She's too good for Bollywood.
[Guest]: No, Amit, this is your arrogance coming in. But she's both, but she's marvellous. But what I was
[Guest]: going to say is that, so I remember I asked him, and I asked him, I said, do you think that RCTs
[Guest]: have just changed the incentive for students in academic economics? And you know, he said yes,
[Guest]: because now, and that was RCTs a while ago. So that was almost, it must be five, seven years ago,
[Guest]: longer than that. And now, you know, there are different trends. And that's fine. I mean,
[Guest]: I don't want anyone listening to us to think that, I certainly don't think that there's anything
[Guest]: wrong with being on trend within academia, because there might be very useful reasons why, you know,
[Guest]: certain models and modes of investigation are being privileged in certain places. And we will
[Guest]: find learn lots of very useful things from them. I think the RCT movement also teaches us that
[Guest]: there's something very useful there. And then there are things you have to take with its caveats as
[Guest]: well, which is true for everything. But while that world can exist and do its thing and play its game
[Guest]: and the circle jerk and all of that that you mentioned, so eloquently, there need to be other
[Guest]: worlds as well. And those have to be created by people. I don't know who and I don't know where.
[Guest]: I mean, if sometime, you know, I leave the bank, these are the kinds of things that I think I'm
[Guest]: really interested in trying to do. I know that I think tanks that are thinking about these kinds
[Guest]: of issues as well. So to me, I think the task is not to get lost in what the academic world is
[Guest]: doing at all. I think let it do what it's doing. And I think there will be value there. That's
[Guest]: fine. I mean, it's I'm not in judgment of that. I think it's great. And if people want to play
[Guest]: the game of those incentives, I understand that as well, because people's livelihoods often are
[Guest]: also on the line. I mean, you have to sort of do certain kinds of things to then get a certain job
[Guest]: and then you can do different, more perhaps open ended work. But people like me who have chosen not
[Guest]: to go down the path of I don't have the talent or the tenacity to finish a PhD in economics,
[Guest]: I would never be able to do it the way it is structured and done. I have different talents,
[Guest]: and I have a different kind of tenacity. And then you have to sort of think about where are the
[Guest]: spaces where I can then apply that. And I think that's where my energies will be better served.
[Guest]: And I think the onus is now on all of us who recognize that there's something wrong with the
[Guest]: way, not wrong, but there's a mismatch between the kind of economics that academia is producing
[Guest]: and generating and deeming legitimate. And are, you know, what we call the more ground realities,
[Guest]: you know, the real world that we would like to sort of apply and marry with this kind of work.
[Guest]: And I think the onus is now on us completely to try and create that. It would require people
[Guest]: who will finance it, it will require people who will actually change their mental models,
[Guest]: the Brahmanism that I was telling you about, you'll have to stop thinking that only, you know,
[Guest]: someone with a doctorate degree has something fancy to say. Anyone can have actually anything
[Guest]: fancy to say. And one of the things I actually really enjoyed when I was writing the book and
[Guest]: even books that I love reading is everyone has a theory on life. And everyone is actually a
[Guest]: philosopher. I really believe this. And I think in the book, you find that all the women, I mean,
[Guest]: when they're talking about Shah Rukh, in a way, what are they doing? They're not actually talking
[Guest]: about him, nobody really knows him. They are constructing him based on some social philosophy
[Guest]: that they have about how the world works, what their sort of knowledge systems are,
[Guest]: what they're drawing on, what they think of the way the world is structured. And I think it is
[Guest]: now it's completely up to us to try and feed a very different kind of ecosystem. And I'd rather
[Guest]: just, you know, pay more attention there. I've abandoned with this book, I've 100% abandoned
[Guest]: the idea that, you know, formal academia, especially academic economists are going to
[Guest]: suddenly, you know, listen to the things I have to say never. I mean, I sort of know, I know,
[Guest]: and I think this goes back to the self awareness that you were talking about. I know exactly the
[Guest]: way people perceive different people and knowledge claims and so on. And I'm not interested in that
[Guest]: game. I think I'm interested in trying to see if we can cultivate a very different space. And that's
[Amit Varma]: the space that I like to operate in. Yeah, I mean, if academic economists don't pay attention
[Amit Varma]: to your book, it's their loss, not your loss. Let's be very clear about that. And yeah, I totally
[Amit Varma]: agree that you need like, let 1000 flowers bloom, let academia do what it does. But let there be a
[Amit Varma]: space for heretics to do what they do. And the other point I wanted to double down on is what
[Amit Varma]: you correctly said that so many people are writing as if they're writing for the government or as if
[Amit Varma]: they're writing for the, you know, the finance ministry to read or they're writing for think
[Amit Varma]: tanks who may offer them a job. Yes, to read. That's absolutely right. Yeah. And I always felt
[Amit Varma]: that if you think your ideas are important, that they express truths about the world that you want
[Amit Varma]: to get out there, then you don't need to go to the supply end of the political marketplace, you need
[Guest]: to go to the demand end. Yes. You know, as Andrew Breitbart said, politics is downstream of culture,
[Amit Varma]: you need to get these ideas out into the culture, which is why I hope that you know, Shah Rukh Khan
[Amit Varma]: reads your book and decides to do something about this. Has he? Has he read your book? Do you know?
[Guest]: Oh, Hamid? No, I don't know. I know that my publishers have sent it. Multiple people I
[Guest]: think have tried. Sadly, I also think he's been through just a hellish crisis in the past few
[Guest]: months. And so I have no idea. I'm waiting with bated breath. I'd be lying if I didn't
[Guest]: acknowledge that, that at some point, or maybe at some point, or maybe the acknowledgement will
[Guest]: never come. And that's okay, as well. I'll tell you a funny story about this, which is I heard
[Guest]: from an artist who had exhibited this beautiful piece of work at the Delhi Art Fair several years
[Guest]: ago. And I think now this is a story which could be true or it could be realm of gossip, but I
[Guest]: think is actually true. But I still want to tell the story, because I think it'll be instructive
[Guest]: of what you asked me. And the work was essentially a pixelated image of Mr. Khan. And it was
[Guest]: essentially his face. But you know, there are images of people in there. And it's really
[Guest]: beautiful. And I think at some point, someone who's known to Mr. Khan was at the gallery when
[Guest]: this was being exhibited. And then they turned and then they said, but you know, we get these kinds
[Guest]: of collages every day. And I think it's a joke, but to essentially say that, you know, last year,
[Guest]: there was this huge hip hop song, which was about him, you know, I think maybe something about how
[Guest]: this man is also Shah Rukh Khan. I think there are people who write poetry and books and Lord
[Guest]: knows what, right for him. So I wouldn't be surprised if the book essentially may even
[Guest]: drown in just the deluge of wonderful things that are, you know, of acts of creativity that his
[Guest]: fandom has inspired. But I'm hopeful. The one thing I will say, actually, though, about him,
[Guest]: I'm very grateful for is, I don't think I would have been able to tell this kind of story,
[Guest]: you know, what she was asked me right in the beginning, I think those two bits, right,
[Guest]: the empathy and the economics in a way, I think the two E's somewhat, I don't think the two would
[Guest]: have coexisted so easily, or the people I spoke to would allow themselves to talk about things so
[Guest]: freely, had it not been for him. And I think that is the power of his icon, because it created
[Guest]: created this space for all of us to talk about different structures and ways we were feeling
[Guest]: lonely. And because fandom is not amid just, you know, we tend to think of it just as a,
[Guest]: it's your personal preference, you like Van Gogh, or you like something else. But actually,
[Guest]: fandom is an economic activities, it's a social activity, but it's also an economic activity,
[Guest]: because to be a fan, and to unambiguously adore the work of an artist, you need money,
[Guest]: you need access to leisure, free time, you need access to markets so that you can consume and buy
[Guest]: and transact, you need access to media and mobile phones increasingly. And all of these are sort of
[Guest]: attributes of, you know, formal the statistics of the economy, because their consumption,
[Guest]: their employment, their liquidity, their purchasing power. But all these women then
[Guest]: just told such beautiful stories about the way they found them. And I think the only reason
[Guest]: that happened was because I entered the lives through fun and fandom, as opposed to going down
[Guest]: another route. And so even if he never reads the book, I mean, I will just I'm always a fan,
[Guest]: a perpetual fan. I know you want, but we'll talk about that. But...
[Amit Varma]: My last criticism of him actually was an economic one, that in Raees,
[Amit Varma]: they didn't understand the concept of the Baptist and the bootlegger.
[Amit Varma]: If you remember the plot of the film, right, which is such a basic
[Guest]: kind of, one can't expect too much also. But Amit, I mean, look at that film, right?
[Guest]: Because what did he do? He took what was, I mean, the book is the movie supposed to be fiction,
[Guest]: but we know it's based on someone who very much was real and existed. But he took essentially
[Guest]: history's straightforward bad guy, right? Because, you know, you've been part, but he made him
[Guest]: complex, and he made him real. And he made him suddenly there was this facet of the Indian Muslim
[Guest]: experience that I had never thought about in essentially the, it wore the dress of a very
[Guest]: typical masala slick mob film, like it's a gangster mobster film. That's I think the way he himself
[Guest]: sees it. I've seen his interviews when he talks about it. So yeah, so I see what you're saying.
[Guest]: But the film was also doing these really interesting other things as well. But so I
[Guest]: think going back to your original question, no, he has not read it formally that I don't know,
[Guest]: inshallah, he will. And even if he doesn't, I'm forever grateful because I don't think this kind
[Guest]: of you know, it's a labor of love. But it's I don't think it would have happened had it not been
[Amit Varma]: for the icon that he is. Yeah. And it's very interesting. Like one of the things that you
[Amit Varma]: point out in your book is how so many women want their men to be like Shah Rukh, but the men are
[Amit Varma]: actually like Salman. Yes. So if Shah Rukh didn't exist, and like you could actually do a book on
[Amit Varma]: toxic masculinity, using Salman as a key figure there, desperately seeking Salman would be a book
[Guest]: exactly about that, right? Yeah, you know, I say this in the book, Amit, which is that of the three
[Guest]: Khans, right, if you look at their filmography, and I do have to take just one side note to say
[Guest]: that so many of the intelligent things that I'm able to say, or even seem like I'm saying,
[Guest]: and I'm writing in the book about film, because I'm not a film scholar, I'm not Jai or Uday or
[Guest]: any of those guys, right? I don't look at it the way I think they look at it. But I'm so grateful,
[Guest]: because I was able to interview all these fantastic film critics who are people like Anupama Chopra,
[Guest]: and so many people who just gave their time. And you know, one thing I realized the book is a sheer
[Guest]: act of generosity. I didn't know any of these people, Amit. I mean, I literally I was cold
[Guest]: calling them. And I think they all just thought that the project was a bit odd. And what is this
[Guest]: girl trying to do? And people were just curious. And so they chatted with me and people can be
[Guest]: generous. I think that's one thing I learned through the book. So all what I'm about to say
[Guest]: about the filmography is based on all these things that I've heard and read, I just want to, you know,
[Guest]: give that caveat. But if you look at the three of them, Salman is, you know, brash, masculine
[Guest]: confidence, exactly as you said, right, he will beat you up, there's the strong body, there's the
[Guest]: stoic, traditional masculinity. Aamir's masculinity is one of, you know, productive professionalism,
[Guest]: because we sort of he is the I think what traditionally Western audiences and increasingly
[Guest]: now Indian audiences amongst the elite would think an actor is Mr. Aamir Khan conforms to that,
[Guest]: right? Because he takes these great roles, these great scripts, meaningful cinema, all that jazz.
[Guest]: Shah Rukh is his icon is one of vulnerability, anxiety, his characters are always vulnerable.
[Guest]: I write this in the book vulnerable to the gaze of the other, they are very aware of the way they
[Guest]: are being seen. And is it really and you know, then they shed tears about it, they talk about
[Guest]: their feelings. And is it really surprising that in a country where women are constantly made to
[Guest]: feel aware of the way they are being seen the way they're holding their bodies, the way they are
[Guest]: being scrutinized, that a man who then starts to perform these roles where he's so aware of how
[Guest]: women are seeing him is everyone's super super hero. I mean, he it's just it's you know, we talk
[Guest]: about demand and supply. I think this is actually what sets up the demand and supply of his of his
[Guest]: icon, which is, he's just always been playing men who engage with women, I measure, as you know,
[Guest]: for the book, I measure how much time women speak in his films compared to his other male
[Guest]: contemporaries. Another big box office hits in Bollywood, women just speak far more, there are
[Guest]: more number of female characters, he's interested in what women have to say his characters care,
[Guest]: they listen, it is not like a lot of these current movies, which apparently are feminist,
[Guest]: because they're about women's issues. But then you have a man essentially speaking through most
[Guest]: of them. His films are not interested in that his films may seem candy floss, and they may seem
[Guest]: soppy. But actually, if you look at them, it's actually a set of interactions between men and
[Guest]: women who are really trying to understand each other, which is why I think he just he creates
[Guest]: this space for female love and self reflection. I don't know whether I don't think these characters
[Guest]: were written with that in mind. But I think if you now look at his body of work, it becomes very
[Amit Varma]: apparent that that's what's happening. I think at one point, it seemed that you know, I forget
[Amit Varma]: about whom I made this observation, either Obama or Modi, who are very different people to make
[Amit Varma]: the same observation about but the observation was something to do with how they are a Rorschach
[Amit Varma]: test. And, you know, you can look at them. And this was, of course, true of maybe Modi pre 2014,
[Amit Varma]: obviously not now. But you could look at them and see what you wanted to see in them. And I guess
[Amit Varma]: to a certain extent it, you know, going through the cross section of all the women in your book
[Amit Varma]: and their different interior lives and their different social circumstances, you know,
[Amit Varma]: and he's playing a different role for them, a lot of certain different roles, which would,
[Amit Varma]: you know, even I think take Shah Rukh by surprise, which is why I wondered if he had read it.
[Guest]: It's interesting what you just said, because one of the things that I really wanted
[Guest]: the reader to walk away from, you know, when we think of fandom, and especially when we think of
[Guest]: fangirls, women who gush immediately, and I've noticed this in some reactions to the book in
[Guest]: the early phase. Now, I think it's it's sort of ebbed out, but which is that well, if women are
[Guest]: gushing, it's just silly. And it's it's foolish. And it's not serious. It is there's just a bunch
[Guest]: of dumb girls. It's so cringe were inducing right that all these girls are sitting and saying all
[Guest]: these gushy foolish things about some guy who they don't know some actor. But, Amit, one thing I
[Guest]: realized is, you know, these things that we dismiss as being silly and very unserious, if you start to
[Guest]: pay attention to them, they'll teach you things that will take you by surprise. And the book,
[Guest]: I think a lot of things I learned took me by surprise. And you realize that actually,
[Guest]: beneath all the gushing and the you know, the exuberance, in a way, each one of these women
[Guest]: are projecting their realities onto him. And I say this in the book, which is his extraordinary
[Guest]: icon is completely built with the ordinary frustrations of all these women. I mean,
[Guest]: they are completely projecting. And in the book, you would have noticed when I speak about him
[Guest]: in public for I call him Mr. Khan, because I don't know him. And he's a real person. And one
[Guest]: has to sort of maintain respect and dignity and all of that, you know, maintain the fact that I
[Guest]: don't know this person at all. But in the book, he's always called Shah Rukh. And the reason that
[Guest]: is, is because none of the women I interviewed, nobody called him Mr. Khan, nobody called him SRK,
[Guest]: they would always call him Shah Rukh. And I remember watching this interview of his where
[Guest]: he actually said fans behave like they know you. And even when I talk about him, you know,
[Guest]: with my friends, when I'm not conscious of myself, I will call him Shah Rukh, like I know him. But
[Guest]: actually, none of us know him, we have all created him out of our own hopes, aspirations, frustrations,
[Guest]: lived experience. So the book, as you know, is structured in different parts. And the first part
[Guest]: is elite, upper middle class women. The principal characters in these stories love him as a sign of
[Guest]: social mobility, post liberalization, they hate Rahul Gandhi, some of them are Modi voters. And
[Guest]: now things are shifting. I write about this in the book. And they love him as a person who
[Guest]: symbolizes someone who has essentially escaped entrenched network wealth, someone who's trying
[Guest]: to find a house for themselves. These are things that they really look when they see him, that's
[Guest]: what they see. When you move towards the second part of the book has women from you know, the
[Guest]: first generation of the middle class, right trader caste families, girls who come from homes where
[Guest]: they were just expected to get married and stay at home. The women in the book didn't they decided
[Guest]: to follow professional identities and parts and love and marry based on their own choice.
[Guest]: They see him essentially for him, he is consolation and comfort because their families
[Guest]: make it so difficult for them. One of the principal characters in that part runs away
[Guest]: from her family, because the family makes it so difficult for them to just be who they are.
[Guest]: And they feel very unloved. And yet they have to put on this front of being very cool and austere.
[Guest]: And he is essentially the person they cry to. He is essentially the person who's providing them
[Guest]: comfort because they can't talk about what they're feeling in their extremely conservative
[Guest]: lives with anybody else. And he plays a very different function. And then when you move to
[Guest]: the third part of the book, where there are all these women from extremely harsh economic
[Guest]: circumstances, agarbatti makers within their homes, domestic workers migrating from Jharkhand
[Guest]: to Jorbag in Delhi, they see him essentially as announcing opportunity and announcing not just
[Guest]: the opportunity to leave your village, but opportunity to find your own lover. Because
[Guest]: one of the most interesting stories to me in the book is how I one of the women I follow,
[Guest]: she's one of the first women I met when I started, you know, the idea of this book.
[Guest]: She was a unioniser actually in a slum in Ahmedabad. Now, it's no longer a slum anymore.
[Guest]: It's an upgraded colony. She left her husband, she did very well for herself. And I described
[Guest]: what she you know, the journey of that within the labour market. And her daughter went to really
[Guest]: good school and they watch Shah Rukh films together. And I say this in the book that
[Guest]: actually, if you look at the older woman, she's Zahira in the book, she couldn't read English
[Guest]: very well. And her daughter could, her daughter's called Meenal. And they watch Dil Toh Pagal Hai
[Guest]: together often, it's their favourite film, they love the songs, they love everything about it.
[Guest]: And at the end of Dil Toh Pagal Hai, there's a line that flashes Amit, I forget what the line
[Guest]: is, I think something about it's an overture to love that people should love, you know,
[Guest]: you should find someone who loves you, something like that. It was written in English. And Zahira,
[Guest]: the mother, she loves Mr. Khan, to her, he is a fantastical ideal of just this beautiful,
[Guest]: fun man, men who are now in cities, you know, things that are happening in cities.
[Guest]: And, but it was not real for her, she, you know, to her, it was just sublimation. And she could,
[Guest]: she couldn't read English. So that line really didn't sit with her. Her daughter, on the other
[Guest]: hand, refuses even now, and I end the book with her, actually, she's still single, she refuses
[Guest]: to settle. In fact, Zahira is trying to get Meenal married, that you must marry. But she says no,
[Guest]: she says no, I she read those lines in English, she believes in the totalitarian, you know, idea
[Guest]: of romance and love that I must love someone who I marry, she will not settle. And and I think for
[Guest]: them, he is essentially the person who announces that your opportunities and your freedom now is
[Guest]: unbounded, you can do things that your mother perhaps couldn't. And I think all of these parts
[Guest]: essentially go to show that people are just constructing him, they're constructing Shah Rukh,
[Guest]: nobody knows Mr. Khan. But we are all constructing Shah Rukh, I have as well. And he has participated
[Guest]: in that myth. And I agree with you, I really hope he reads it just to see what he's co created with
[Guest]: a whole bunch of us this entire generation of women. It's quite special and quite spectacular.
[Guest]: But it is a creation, it is a construction. And I think the book is in service to understand how
[Guest]: is it that society and within society, the economy is allowing the space or pushing women to construct
[Guest]: the Shah Rukh? Why are they doing that? And they're doing that because the economy and their
[Guest]: society and homes make them feel very unloved in places unsafe in some places. And so they're
[Amit Varma]: projecting onto this image. In popular culture, one of the interesting sort of shifts that I've
[Amit Varma]: seen not really a shift, but it's a new development in one sense, is that back in the day, stars would
[Amit Varma]: be larger than life. So you'd, you know, you'd have temples for stars and blah, blah, blah,
[Amit Varma]: all of that, you'd worship them, or you'd wait outside the house, just just to catch one glimpse.
[Amit Varma]: And where does kind of changing in modern times is that there is what people call the economy of
[Amit Varma]: intimacy, where because of, you know, YouTube streams, or podcasts, you feel like you actually
[Amit Varma]: know the person like, I did this episode with Abhinandan Sekri, and I got this lovely piece
[Amit Varma]: of feedback, I think someone tweeted it or wrote to me. And he said that I felt so much like I'm
[Amit Varma]: sitting on a sofa with you guys, and you guys are talking, and I'm enjoying myself that at
[Unknown]: one point, I actually interrupted you before realizing that shit, I'm listening to a podcast.
[Amit Varma]: That's lovely. And the interesting thing about Shah Rukh, as you mentioned, and even I called
[Amit Varma]: him Shah Rukh, see, is that he seems to straddle both of these. He is on the one hand larger than
[Amit Varma]: life. But on the other hand, you call him Shah Rukh. And I recently wrote a post about the
[Amit Varma]: Beatles documentary, Get Back, where at one point I said Paul and Ringo. Yeah. And of course, we know
[Amit Varma]: that the first time you mentioned someone in a piece, you have to take the full name. Yeah. And
[Unknown]: then you take the surname. Yeah. But I just said Paul and Ringo, because to me, they're Paul and
[Guest]: Ringo. Yeah, right. I grew up with them. They're my childhood friends. Yeah. And in the book,
[Guest]: in fact, it's something that I noticed at the very end, it didn't even occur to me that I was
[Guest]: doing this. But I was. And I was doing it because all the women who I spoke to were doing it,
[Guest]: which is we only call him Shah Rukh, because there is this, he's accessible. But you know,
[Guest]: it's interesting, Amit, because he's like, in a way, he, I think, in India, really revolutionized
[Guest]: this. I've actually, this economy of intimacy is a great phrase. And I'm going to go look it up. I
[Guest]: thank you for telling me about it. It's interesting, because if you look back to 1992,
[Guest]: and I know so many of your shows, you talk about the changes there. And I find those
[Guest]: conversations really fascinating. It was such an era of promise and so much change, right? Because
[Guest]: suddenly, there were satellite network televisions, there were, you know, page three, which needed
[Guest]: Bollywood. And he was the first actor who could be intimate with us in a way on our televisions,
[Guest]: even before the internet came and completely changed things even further. That I don't even
[Guest]: think Rajesh Khanna or, you know, none of the actors of the past had who had the temples and,
[Guest]: you know, mad fandom as well, but in a very different way. And so as a consequence,
[Guest]: he just seemed like this guy you knew. So when I was watching him on TV, and also then, and then
[Guest]: it requires talent, because obviously, no celebrities ever really presenting themselves.
[Guest]: I mean, that's, I don't think that happens. So there's a talent in which he also had this
[Guest]: facility to engage with media to talk to people. It was just his interviews. I mean, I think
[Guest]: they're just delicious. Just listen to the things he's saying. And I know you don't,
[Guest]: you may not like his movies, but highly encourage you to look at some interviews.
[Guest]: And I mean, I can even give you a list of interviews to start with. But always useful
[Guest]: things about be it secularism, the economy, work ethic, professionalism. He has this terrific line,
[Guest]: when someone asked him, this is when the film Dilwale came out, I'm going to say 2015,
[Guest]: in a big press conference, you know, this young woman got up, you know, young journalist, and
[Guest]: she said something about actually her working life that apparently she couldn't work and
[Guest]: she was struggling to hold on to a job, right? This is exactly in link with the theme of the book.
[Guest]: He said something like, ladies, don't leave your job, your day job for a night husband.
[Unknown]: You know, who says things like that? I mean, the comments are just and I sometimes you just
[Guest]: have to listen and the book is full of quotes of his, because I just found that the things he was
[Guest]: saying and the fact that now telecom and the TV allowed for those things to then be said and
[Guest]: relayed and then the internet has just amplified that. But I think for a certain generation of us,
[Guest]: for us, he essentially represents that change, because he was the first star that we saw
[Guest]: who made that that dramatic shift, which is became much more intimate to us.
[Guest]: And I actually say this in the book that all the elite fans always call him, you know,
[Guest]: he's India's first post liberalization superstar. But for women who don't know words, you know,
[Guest]: like GDP, they don't know what happened with Mr. Manmohan Singh. They know Shah Rukh was
[Guest]: liberalization to them, his poster, him drinking a Pepsi, him being on top of that truck and,
[Guest]: you know, dancing with Shahid Kapoor and all of those images, they've seen all of that.
[Guest]: It's signal to them that their call would always connect now. Suddenly there were powders and
[Guest]: creams in the local shop and Shah Rukh was, you know, was a little poster there.
[Guest]: And so I think there is an intimacy that he has with us,
[Guest]: not just because of course, the TV allowed for it. But I think because he represents this nostalgia
[Guest]: of this really promising moment, right? And now, of course, we're in a very different moment. And
[Guest]: I think he is also capturing that. And we'll talk about that later. But I do see that. The other
[Guest]: thing I noticed when I was talking to women now about, you know, all these actors now available
[Guest]: to us through YouTube. And one thing that's also happened, I mentioned this in the book,
[Guest]: and it's a thesis that I can't fully test, but I do think my gut tells me that there's something
[Guest]: to it, is that I think people like him are they're part of the last generation of umbrella superstars
[Guest]: who connect people from across classes, languages, regions. Because now when I talk to younger
[Guest]: people, if you are in Jharkhand, or you're in Kerala, or you're in Delhi, because the media
[Guest]: market and what's accessible to you has become so fragmented based on your taste, because of the
[Guest]: internet, right, you can see things that are almost curated to you on YouTube or anywhere else.
[Guest]: The idea of this one star who everybody likes is actually doesn't hold as much weight anymore.
[Guest]: The closest I could, you know, sense of that kind of popularity is actually now the female
[Guest]: actresses I hear a lot about, you know, be it a Deepika Padukone or a Priyanka Chopra. And they
[Guest]: really seem to now embody feminine aspirations for even younger women in the book, because
[Guest]: they are independent, they're not ashamed of having boyfriends, they continue to work after
[Guest]: marriage. But the idea of this star who connects people, be it a boatman, a bureaucrat across
[Guest]: the country, I think Shah Rukh might actually be that generation might actually be one of the last
[Guest]: because now we're just living in a very fragmented media system, because of all the forces that you
[Guest]: mentioned, be it the internet, YouTube, and so on.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that's a fantastic insight and a great term umbrella superstar. I'm going to come back to that
[Amit Varma]: after the break. But before we go in for the break, I just want to say that I don't think we
[Amit Varma]: really look at that I disagree with any of what you say about Shah Rukh. I think we're looking at
[Amit Varma]: the elephant through different lenses. And you might not agree with my lens. See, my lens is that
[Amit Varma]: like, one of the things I've come to realize is that Indian cinema is a completely different
[Amit Varma]: beast from cinema anywhere else. There are different incentives. Yeah, and we could just
[Amit Varma]: break it down economically, but it is just incredibly different. It's catering to something
[Amit Varma]: else. And therefore our notions of acting also have to take that into account that you cannot
[Amit Varma]: judge an Indian star through your lens of what a Western actor would be and how they would act and
[Amit Varma]: play a part and all of that. And Shah Rukh, I think seen from that Western kind of lens is I think
[Amit Varma]: the worst actor of all time. But that that is, but in a sense that is irrelevant. It's orthogonal.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, because it's a category error, perhaps to judge him like that. Because at doing what he is
[Amit Varma]: doing, which is his build this persona, that persona clearly has a resonance with so many
[Amit Varma]: different people in so many different ways. And to maintain that persona and take it into all
[Amit Varma]: these different directions is a phenomenal achievement. I grant him that. And by the way,
[Amit Varma]: I love some Bollywood. I love Govinda, for example. I know. I'm aware. I'm aware.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, private. But I would demonetize me. And as far as his interviews are concerned,
[Amit Varma]: please do share all the links. I'll put them in the show notes for people to see for themselves.
[Amit Varma]: But my sense from the little that I've seen is that they're also very skillfully,
[Amit Varma]: he's built a persona. And he is that persona. And he says some things where he is clearly
[Amit Varma]: posturing like even in your book, you quote this part where he says that and this is like
[Amit Varma]: Virtue Signaling Max, where he says that I don't believe in feminism because feminism only says
[Amit Varma]: that women should be equal to men. And he says, quote, I believe women should be more than us,
[Guest]: stop quote, like, give me a break. I know, but a couple of things. One, I have friends who are
[Guest]: trained in like, posh, fancy, you know, drama school. So they went to RADA and all of those
[Guest]: places. I asked them once, this is like a test. I was doing research. I don't write about it. I
[Guest]: thought about writing about it. But I didn't finally, because it didn't involve the women.
[Guest]: I asked them, can you do like that arms wide open, you know, with that, just can you conjure
[Guest]: that? And it's near impossible. And they all told me that the kind, it requires a kind of talent
[Guest]: and register, which is quite unique, I think is unique to very Indic traditions of, you know,
[Guest]: drama and local theatre. And I can tell, you know, when you watch him as well, when he talks
[Guest]: about acting as a craft, you can tell that he's bringing in all these different elements, right.
[Guest]: And so I do think that while I, you know, I'm not going to judge anyone, because if we start judging
[Guest]: Keanu Reeves, for instance, from the perspective of a Western actor, I think we may actually end
[Guest]: up seeing similar things. In fact, I think there's a strong parallel between the two of them,
[Guest]: interestingly enough. So maybe on my next will be desperately seeking Keanu. But what I'm trying to
[Guest]: say to you is that I think there is a kind of talent and technique there. It's just so skillfully
[Guest]: done that we don't see it for what it is, but it's really difficult to do. And there are trained
[Guest]: actors who will try and there are trained actors who have tried, there's some very talented actors
[Guest]: who've tried, but they just can't get that register. So I think we do have to acknowledge
[Guest]: that while I see your point. And the other thing I will say about him is that even the, you know,
[Guest]: what we would think is posturing or some of the lip service kind of comments, I still felt when
[Guest]: I was talking to the women that I was and I think about this myself as well, you would have noticed
[Guest]: this actually comes up in the book a lot. A lot of women say, well, even if he is just saying it
[Guest]: as marketing, I appreciate that he's saying it. And one of the places that really keeps coming up
[Guest]: is he's actually one of our only icons who from a very early stage has been talking about women's
[Guest]: issues. And even if it is, I don't care, honestly, Amit, if it's a stunt, if it's posturing, whatever
[Guest]: it is, given the society we live in, given look at where we are when it comes to gender, things
[Guest]: are incredibly bleak, more power to more powerful messages. I would like him to, you know, shout
[Guest]: more about lots of things, but, you know, he won't do that. He'll do what he wants to say. And that's
[Guest]: his prerogative and sovereignty. So I actually appreciate all of that because, you know, one of
[Guest]: the women said to me, she said, well, have you noticed that he says all these wonderful things
[Guest]: about, you know, his family, his wife, you know, women. And she says, she said, and it's quoted in
[Guest]: the book, she said that even if it is an act, I appreciate it, because who else is doing that?
[Guest]: And I think particularly when he came onto the scene, nowadays, I think there's some cachet to
[Guest]: being the tender male in sort of, you know, certain kind of appearance on social media.
[Guest]: But I see that for what it is, he was doing this way before. And I think one of the places where
[Guest]: he was doing this significantly, which is really interesting is, and I write about it at length in
[Guest]: the book is, you know, he was always Indian cinema's poster child for marital fidelity,
[Guest]: which is really interesting, right? Like all the women I met, they would tell me,
[Guest]: so great, he's always with his wife. And he's so caring and loving for his wife. And you know,
[Guest]: he's been with her forever, whereas everyone else is sort of seen as some constantly chasing skirt,
[Guest]: playboy superstar. And he was definitely not that he completely died. He departed from that
[Guest]: completely. And he in various interviews would constantly say, because people would shamelessly
[Guest]: then Amit ask him and all people was Tavleen Singh, who asked him in an interview, very serious
[Guest]: interview, she asks, and I quote this in the book, she says, how come you don't have any affairs?
[Guest]: Because it's so common for actors to have affairs. And it was I think Rajiv Shukla asked him something
[Guest]: similar in an interview once on Doordarshan of all places. And he just looked bored. And he said,
[Guest]: well, I thought that the women I work with, they are my co workers and colleagues, I didn't realize
[Guest]: that I'm supposed to make love to them. And of course, he's being his beautiful, sarcastic best.
[Guest]: But so many women just appreciated the fact that he treated women as comrades, as colleagues,
[Guest]: as friends in the workplace. And this is the pre me to world. And we can only imagine what was
[Guest]: happening in Bollywood at that time and what kind of space it was. And so even if it is an act,
[Guest]: Amit, and even if there is posturing, and I think you heard Paramita Vohra say something similar to
[Guest]: what I'm saying, I think there's the club of women who are so hopelessly in love with this man,
[Guest]: but we appreciate it. Because I think at the time that he was saying this, no one else at that time
[Guest]: really was in our culture, the way he was saying it and with the intensity that he was and I think
[Amit Varma]: that's really appreciated. This is really scary. You seem to have researched me as well as I
[Amit Varma]: researched you. You're referring to the Paramita episode where I just remembered Paro and I also
[Amit Varma]: argued about Shahrukh. No, I completely agree with this. And you know, this mirrors what Salman
[Amit Varma]: Sohs, the Congress politician once said to me, he came on my show and I asked him that is there
[Amit Varma]: anything about Modi that you like? And he said, I like the Swachh Bharat campaign, because forget
[Amit Varma]: what the result is the fact that he's preaching the virtue of cleanliness, preaching the virtue
[Amit Varma]: of something that is desirable itself makes an impact given his massive reach. So now that we
[Amit Varma]: have established that the Prime Minister Modi has something in common with both Barack Obama
[Amit Varma]: and Shahrukh Khan, I think it's time we take a break.
[Amit Varma]: Well, that phase in my life ended for various reasons. And now it is time to revive it. Only
[Amit Varma]: now I'm doing it through a newsletter. I have started the India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com
[Amit Varma]: where I will write regularly about whatever catches my fancy. I'll write about some of the
[Amit Varma]: themes I cover in this podcast and about much else. So please do head on over to indiancut.substack.com
[Amit Varma]: and subscribe. It is free. Once you sign up, each new installment that I write will land up
[Amit Varma]: in your email inbox, you don't need to go anywhere. So subscribe now for free,
[Amit Varma]: the India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com. Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Economics works, you know, to do that first will I think help if we then zoom in later into a lot
[Amit Varma]: of the particular stories that you've gotten into because that context is fantastic. Now I did an
[Amit Varma]: episode a while back a couple of years back about women in the workplace with Amitabh Bhandari.
[Amit Varma]: And we kind of discussed that really puzzling thing that as our economy has grown, and it was
[Amit Varma]: growing at that time, as our economy has grown, less women are working. Yes. And you've broken
[Amit Varma]: this out extremely well in your book. So take me through sort of the four different reasons why we
[Guest]: see less women in the workplace. Amit, I think the first thing that we need to understand when
[Guest]: we talk about this is I want to set the context for how the data is collected on the basis of
[Guest]: which we see that this is happening. And I actually know the episode as well. And I follow your show
[Guest]: quite regularly. So good, good, good listener. I think you've learned stalking from your hero.
[Guest]: Amit, don't embarrass me. But a couple of things. One is when the government, this is the NSS data
[Guest]: on employment and unemployment, it tends to be what I want to just tell everyone is it tends to
[Guest]: be quite consistent across the periods of time. So it's not like there are some changes in
[Guest]: methodology, some changes may be in sampling. But broadly, we're talking about it's a broad
[Guest]: apples to apples comparison. So when I see that female employment rates and labor force participation
[Guest]: rates have dropped dramatically from 2004 till 2017, that's actually a robust claim,
[Guest]: because it's a robust claim using a measure that stayed quite standard. I think that's
[Guest]: very important to know. It's not like we're suddenly changing the way it's designed.
[Guest]: The second thing I want everyone to know is that when we measure women's work, in fact,
[Guest]: statisticians and I, a community that I have deep admiration for is more than economists is
[Guest]: statisticians, because they really get into the nuts and bolts of how do you construct these numbers,
[Guest]: which try and convey something about reality, right, much like film. And one of the things that
[Guest]: you learn when you look at the history of Indian employment statistics, and I get into that a little
[Guest]: bit just for the reader to have some context in the book, is that they were very concerned about
[Guest]: the fact that Indians hold multiple jobs, the nature of our labor market is segmented, very
[Guest]: fluid, you could be doing something one hour or something else the next hour, you could be paid
[Guest]: for it, you could be helping your family with something productive. And so actually, the measure
[Guest]: that they use is fairly broad and inclusive. So I often get asked, is my domestic worker counted?
[Guest]: Technically, yes, someone who is a part time domestic worker, or full time domestic worker,
[Guest]: even if you're not working, you know, the traditional office job, nine to five,
[Guest]: you will be counted. So casual workers, self employed workers, and so on, I just want
[Guest]: all of us to just be clear that it's not that this is just salaried workers were often counted,
[Guest]: because I get questions like that all the time. Now, given that we see the sharp drop,
[Guest]: and you're absolutely right, I think there's been a lot written about, even with economic growth,
[Guest]: we see this complete drop, which actually makes India quite an exception from other countries,
[Guest]: even in a Turkey and China, where you see stagnating female employment, you don't see
[Guest]: the same sharp drop that we've seen. And if you look at all the literature, there are sort of
[Guest]: broadly four buckets of things that are going on. One is what I think many people call the income
[Guest]: effect. And it's quite worrying, but essentially, the data suggests is that as families start to
[Guest]: earn more money, they are able to purchase more conservative values. And this is particularly
[Guest]: seen amongst the upper caste. So for example, in the book, upper caste well to do families in
[Guest]: particular, where if in fact, if you look at the top 10% of India right now using the CMI data for
[Guest]: 2019, and I mentioned this in the book, of all married women, I think in the richest cohort,
[Guest]: only 6.5% hold a job. And so the income effect is giving you a flavour of why this is happening. And
[Guest]: what this body of literature suggests is that because families now earn more, there's no need
[Guest]: for an additional income earner. So women don't need to go out of the home to work. So they can
[Guest]: now retreat into full time mothering, caring, right. And this explains why seven out of 10 women
[Guest]: between the ages of 15 to 59 are full time working within the home, they're attending to household
[Amit Varma]: duties. That's what it's called statistically. That's one. So just to just to sort of double
[Amit Varma]: click on that itself. Yeah, one more time. But the psychological aspect of that is very important,
[Amit Varma]: like interesting, the phrase you used is, once the income goes up, they can buy more conservative
[Amit Varma]: values. And therefore, the way I would interpret that is that the traditional notion is that a
[Unknown]: woman's place is in the house, she should be looking after the kitchen, after the children,
[Amit Varma]: so on and so forth. And somehow the owner of the house is stained if the woman has to go out and
[Amit Varma]: work. But you know, when you have constraints of income, and she absolutely has to work,
[Guest]: what do you do? Yeah. But once that is gone, the women get back into the house.
[Guest]: And Amit, in fact, you're seeing that play out right now, because what many people are expecting,
[Guest]: and you would have seen in the recent round of the periodic labor force survey, we see female
[Guest]: employment rates actually rose a bit and then have stabilized. And one of the things that people
[Guest]: are now trying to understand, and we need to dig into it much deeper is that is it that crisis is
[Guest]: now creating this need for women to step out of the home? We don't know, it's a mixed bag.
[Guest]: But you're absolutely right. There is this notion that women's work is flexible, women's labor is
[Guest]: flexible. So women are, remember, women are always working. We say they're not employed for money,
[Guest]: but women are always working. If you look at time poverty numbers of women, women are always busy
[Guest]: cooking, cleaning, collecting water, creating firewood, all kinds of work in rural areas.
[Guest]: In urban areas, women are working, managing domestic roles. Not everyone has a maid. I
[Guest]: think that's a fallacy. We need to sort of have some vision correction. It's the really wealthy
[Guest]: who do and the real upper middle class that does. Most women are always working. But I think when
[Guest]: we're talking about these sharp drops, it's for paid employment, of course. Now, given that,
[Guest]: if women are seen as a flexible resource for the household, you then realize that if you really
[Guest]: need it, then women can work outside the home. And so what the income effect is saying is post
[Guest]: liberalization, post this big boom in the economy, essentially many households said,
[Guest]: we don't need you to work. Now, I want to just caveat that also by saying that there's a little
[Guest]: bit nuance there, because that may not always be a bad thing, because there may actually be women,
[Guest]: you encounter them in the book, who actually say that I don't want to be working outside
[Guest]: because I'm working inside all the time. Now I need to go out and earn in the world, which is
[Guest]: so unsafe and horrid to women in public spaces anyway. Why is the man in my life not meeting the
[Guest]: breadwinning end of his contract in the marriage? And so many women actually would say that if he's
[Guest]: doing well enough, I'm happy to be at home and care full time within the home. That's something
[Guest]: that actually is an empowered choice in a way for some women. So while this effect is existing,
[Guest]: and we're seeing women drop out, there's a sense of nuance there, which is part of it could actually
[Guest]: be welfare enhancing for some women, and part of it couldn't be as well. So it's both. So that's
[Guest]: the income effect. The second is, of course, an underestimation effect on it. And that I think,
[Guest]: when I started by discussing the way these numbers are constructed, I myself, when I was working for
[Guest]: the Institute of Social Studies Trust, this is a paper which was published in EPW, we did a survey
[Guest]: of women's employment in Delhi. And what we realised was the moment you use female surveyors,
[Guest]: volunteer students, who will essentially, these are young students, they're interested to probe
[Guest]: more, ask more questions, they will pick up women's employment. Whereas if you just go
[Guest]: standard and ask, do you work? Most women will just say no. So many women will say,
[Guest]: I don't have a job, but I'm working, right? I'm helping my family. And so when someone asks as
[Guest]: a statistical entity, are you working, the temptation may just be to not report their work.
[Guest]: So there is a kind of underestimation because of misreporting, not capturing women's work well,
[Guest]: not asking enough probing questions to do full justice to a very good survey instrument that
[Guest]: the government does implement through its statistical machinery. I think it's quite
[Guest]: robust. So there's an underestimation effect there, which continues to hold and it's not just
[Guest]: our paper, then this has been corroborated by several other pieces of work by different
[Guest]: organizations and different scholars essentially saying that women's work tends to be misunderstood
[Guest]: and underreported. So that's the second. The third is more hopeful, is what I think people
[Guest]: like Surjeet Bhalla, Ravinder Kaur, they call it the education effect. And the idea is that because
[Guest]: younger girls and young women are studying more, are spending more time in college or in continuing
[Guest]: to finish school, they are essentially not working in the early part of their career. Well, these
[Guest]: aren't careers, these are typically, you know, people doing ad hoc jobs, given the kind of
[Guest]: milieu, the social milieu we're talking about, because they're studying more, they're not
[Guest]: working. And so that's, that's actually quite good, which is that, you know, you're studying
[Guest]: more, then you immediately get married, and then your marriage is your job, in a way. So that's
[Guest]: the third. The fourth, which I actually find the most interesting, and I don't think enough
[Guest]: is said about this, this is work by Martin Rama and Rinku Murgai and Urmila Chatterjee,
[Guest]: in fact, colleagues of mine at the bank, others have been doing this work as well,
[Guest]: essentially saying, they call it the structural transformation effect in a way, or the structural
[Guest]: transformation of the economy. And one of the things, I'd really encourage everyone to look
[Guest]: at this paper, not only because I think it has really beautiful insights on what's happening
[Guest]: to women's work, but the data work is really nicely done. It's just a very good work of
[Guest]: econometrics, using government data sets. One of the things they find is that the way the Indian
[Guest]: economy has changed with the move away from agriculture, the boost to construction, certain
[Guest]: kinds of services, sectors that traditionally used to employ women, such as agriculture,
[Guest]: or flexible work within the home, small scales, cottage industries, for instance,
[Guest]: those have been in deep decline. And the transformation of the economy seems to have
[Guest]: really helped men because there's a study by scholars of the ILO, what they find is if you
[Guest]: look at the top 10 fastest growing sectors in the economy, post liberalisation, women have only
[Guest]: received 19% of the jobs, one nine, which means most of the employment gains of that growth and
[Guest]: the transformation in the Indian economy have been cornered by men. And it's a bit different
[Guest]: from the others, because instead of a demand story, sorry, instead of a supply story that
[Guest]: the household is unwilling to let women supply their labour outside the home, this is looking
[Guest]: much more at sectors who demand labour. And what they're saying is that the economy is moving and
[Guest]: changing in such a way that sectors that would typically demand women's time and their labour
[Guest]: and pay them no longer exist. And in fact, you see this playing out in the book, Amit, I met
[Guest]: all these home based garment workers and Agarbati workers in 2006. This is a time when there was a
[Guest]: slight, you know, bump up right around that period. Immediately after slowly and particularly
[Guest]: post demonetisation, these home based industries and it's all essentially, it's a depressed sector
[Guest]: now, because incense sticks, garments have moved to either special economic zones, or they're much
[Guest]: more organised and clustered in certain areas. And so in fact, some of this flexible work that
[Guest]: women were doing, and they enjoyed this work, because it allowed them to combine their
[Guest]: reproductive work as well as their work outside for the market, those opportunities are shrinking,
[Guest]: the wages that are shrinking as well. And so that's the structural transformation story.
[Guest]: There's a specific, so these are the four broad buckets. And there's one very interesting,
[Guest]: I find the paper just fascinating, this is by Farzana Afridi, she's at ISI and her colleagues,
[Guest]: and what they find looking at rural women, because one of the things that we have to realise about
[Guest]: this drop is that it's while urban female employment rates has always stayed around 13%,
[Guest]: 14%. It's always that it's been fairly stable. So the gap actually has been fairly stable over
[Guest]: the past 30 years. It's actually rural areas where the sharp drop in female employment has
[Guest]: been acutely seen as a rural phenomena. And part of it is that agriculture structural transformation
[Guest]: story that I told you, part of is the education story, underestimation, households are earning
[Guest]: more money, you see this in the book, there's a character who's in rural Uttar Pradesh,
[Guest]: her husband is an electrician and a carpenter, post liberalisation, suddenly government wants
[Guest]: to give out PWD contracts, right to all these young men, they're earning much more. So the
[Guest]: expectation is now the woman doesn't need to work, that's the income effect. And you see all of this
[Guest]: playing out. But in rural areas, there's one additional factor which people like Farzana and
[Guest]: others are trying to sort of unpack more. And I think it's just really interesting work. What
[Guest]: they're saying is that with more primary education, women's role as unpaid caregivers who
[Guest]: will improve the human capital of their children, because they've studied more so they can manage
[Guest]: children better, invest in their nutrition better, teach them better. So the kids can grow up to be
[Guest]: more productive members of the labour market, the value to the home of women as unpaid workers
[Guest]: is actually much higher than the wage that they would earn outside doing, you know, low end
[Guest]: agriculture work or other kinds of work. And so women are retreating, because it's almost a way
[Guest]: to improve the productivity of the household at the margin, I think is really interesting. And
[Guest]: they find this specifically in rural areas. And so I think these are broadly the big theories.
[Guest]: And I think three messages around that, right, one, which we all know, motherhood and marriage
[Guest]: are typically what are just kicking women out of the workforce constantly. And I say kicking,
[Guest]: but then I want to again, nuance that because many times just a voluntary withdrawal as well.
[Guest]: And I think we have to just acknowledge that, that many women would just say that I'd prefer
[Guest]: and I find more meaning in just being at home being a mother caring, and that's that's a choice.
[Guest]: And I think the other is that if you look at the way women are interacting with the job market,
[Guest]: essentially, if you look at manufacturing, for instance, I think 64% of women involved in
[Guest]: manufacturing work from home, the home even before the pandemic before work from home became a you
[Guest]: know, public health measure. The home was the principal workplace. And for men, it's about 15%.
[Guest]: So there is this very important schematic, I want all of us in fact, read the book,
[Guest]: when you consume these numbers, when you read the studies to recognize that actually often
[Guest]: when we're talking about women who are working, who is the working woman, she's at home, she may
[Guest]: not be going out of the home, she may be making something at home, she may be cooking and cleaning
[Guest]: on another person's home. But the home as a site for female labor, that's a very enduring aspect of
[Guest]: women's presence in the economy that hasn't really changed that significantly. And so I think these
[Guest]: are the five buckets of theories. There's marriage motherhood, which I think is often talked about.
[Guest]: And the fact that the home is the key site, if you want to really impact the labor conditions
[Guest]: of women, you're not going to do that through policies that don't attack the home, be it
[Guest]: shelter security, I think I talked about this earlier, be it shelter security, childcare
[Guest]: investments, thinking about improved access to water, and you're seeing these dynamics play out.
[Guest]: And the last thing I will say, this is sort of emerging work, which is not really a theory,
[Guest]: but I think it will intuitively make sense to everyone, which is that India has grown in such
[Guest]: a way that there are clusters where jobs and opportunities exist, right? Jobs don't exist
[Guest]: everywhere equally. That's just not the case. That's not at all the case. What's happening is
[Guest]: men can migrate out to find jobs from Bhuvaneshwar, they can go to Bombay from anywhere else, they can
[Guest]: go anywhere, public spaces safe for them, housing is safe for them for really, you know, low income
[Guest]: men, even, you know, sleeping on the streets is potentially a possibility, sadly, and that does
[Guest]: happen. And you have these labor chalks and so on. For women, though, educated, even those who
[Guest]: come from very difficult backgrounds, the idea of migrating en masse to follow economic opportunity,
[Guest]: the benefit to that is just not worth families incurring the social cost, because they're
[Guest]: worried about girl safety. What if she finds a boyfriend? What if you know, something happens,
[Guest]: there are all these concerns. And so often what ends up happening is the few stories we hear of
[Guest]: women migrating for work often now with, you know, special economic zones, they migrate through a
[Guest]: contractor or domestic workers who migrate through contractor are harrowing stories of harassment,
[Guest]: because often the contractor and many of these factories and SECs are treating women the way a
[Guest]: benevolent patriarch would write like extremely rigid rules about where you can go out, whether
[Guest]: you can use your phone, all these kinds of things about domestic workers, we know there's issues
[Guest]: about withholding wages, not being paid on time, abuse, harassment again. And so hearing these
[Guest]: stories, listening to these experiences, migration out to follow jobs is not something that women can
[Guest]: safely and freely do. And I think that's really important. And the last thing on this, I will say,
[Guest]: I realized I've said a lot is that caste continues to be the most important, not barrier, but
[Guest]: mediator of jobs. And what I mean by that is that there was a Pew survey recently,
[Guest]: which essentially found that even in 2021, in the middle of the pandemic, when people asked Indians,
[Guest]: are you comfortable with your daughter marrying outside of her caste community? Most Indians said
[Guest]: no. And they're extremely worried about who the woman marries, this obsession with female sexual
[Guest]: purity is just doesn't seem to change. And that fear around caste purity plays itself out in the
[Guest]: labor market. Because why is it that all these families are so scared of women going even to
[Guest]: Gurgaon in the book, you actually talk about a character, her father's willing to let her work
[Guest]: in the Delhi secretariat, because he thinks that's government and it's understood. But the idea of
[Guest]: her going and taking up perhaps a higher paying job in a private company in Gurgaon is very worrying,
[Guest]: because he's immediately associating it with boyfriends, love affairs, Lord knows who she
[Guest]: will suddenly end up with. And this fear around female sexuality, what will women do with their
[Guest]: bodies and their hearts? We don't think of sexuality when we think of the labor market,
[Guest]: but actually, the two are extremely connected. And you see this in the book. And I think caste is
[Guest]: the reason why because there are such scripts of womanhood needs to bear, as you mentioned earlier,
[Guest]: not just the honor of the home, but the caste honor of the home, right. And that is the reason
[Guest]: why women's access to jobs just remains so severely compromised. Because even if options
[Guest]: exist, families will make women feel so tense and unhappy about following them up that many women
[Guest]: will just say, well, to hell with it. Whereas in the book, in fact, there are stories of women who
[Guest]: say no, we want to still pursue and then the stories tell you what happens when they try and
[Amit Varma]: fight their families to just go find a job. Lucid illustration of social pressures having,
[Amit Varma]: you know, an impact on the labor market. It's people wouldn't often connect the two. Before
[Amit Varma]: I move on to my next question, I want to not double click but mouse over perhaps on what you
[Amit Varma]: said about the structural transformation effect that can you give me examples of some of these
[Guest]: new industries which are coming up, which tend to attract more men? Construction and often and in
[Guest]: fact, imagine and I mean, the thing that we also realize need to realize is these are all interacting
[Guest]: effects. So for example, with construction, sometimes wives may follow men, but because of
[Guest]: the underestimation effect, many times that work is perhaps not even captured. But and also many
[Guest]: of the times women are not paid independently, they're essentially following for care purposes.
[Guest]: And many times men just migrate out on their own. If you look at the sectors that have really boomed
[Guest]: post liberalization, it's construction, it's retail, it's transport and majority of employment
[Guest]: gains here. And this should not surprise us intuitively. These are jobs that require movement.
[Guest]: These are jobs that require interacting with public space. These are jobs that require a fair
[Guest]: amount of haggling and negotiating and interacting with lots of strangers. These are all jobs that
[Guest]: largely men have essentially found and and also the nature of the skill and the what what's
[Guest]: required. And it's frustrating. I think for a lot of women in rural India, I think the urban
[Guest]: landscape is still different. I actually think the urban landscape hasn't dramatically changed.
[Guest]: I think the jobs have changed and women are the kinds of families who would support women to work
[Guest]: like mine, for instance, will continue to do so. And it's just the nature of the job may change.
[Guest]: You know, we may not work in a bank much more than perhaps just be a teacher. But we should
[Guest]: remember teaching nursing. These are actually the core occupations that urban women are involved in.
[Guest]: But in rural areas, it's very frustrating. And this is a frustration that finds its way in
[Guest]: the book is that many of these girls are the first generation to study in a school. They
[Guest]: after Sarveshiksha Abhiyan, which was the previous the district primary education program,
[Guest]: the predecessor of Sarveshiksha Abhiyan, they are educated. I say this, they're numerate,
[Guest]: they're literate, and they're ready to go somewhere. But they can't. And their brothers
[Guest]: take up jobs as contractors, plumbers, electricians, all kinds of things that are available
[Guest]: to them. And to them, that's an adventure, you know, moving from even a village in Rampur to
[Guest]: the city of Bareilly, moving from Bareilly, then perhaps to Dubai, like all that these are all
[Guest]: transitions that are happening in the book. But for girls, it's still, you need to be married,
[Guest]: if you want to go somewhere. I think the structural transformation story is really
[Guest]: bears itself out, particularly in rural India, because suddenly you had jobs in building roads,
[Guest]: trading, transporting, those jobs just were not available to women at scale.
[Amit Varma]: And what you said about women having to be married to go somewhere. One of the best books I've read
[Amit Varma]: in the last few years while doing the scene and the unseen was India moving by Chinmay Tumbe.
[Amit Varma]: And my great TIL moment there was that the maximum internal migration happens in India
[Amit Varma]: because of women getting married, because women get married, and then they just go with their
[Unknown]: husband, which just tells you so much about the lack of agency and so on and so forth.
[Guest]: You know, in fact, there's a beautiful line, I forget, Indian author in her book, she says,
[Guest]: once you're married, you're free to do anything your husband wants you to do.
[Guest]: And, you know, in the book, this finds in my book, this it's interesting, I see that play out,
[Guest]: but there's a particular woman I met in rural Uttar Pradesh in the district of Rampur, she makes
[Guest]: embroidery work at home. And one of the things she says is that for her marriage is her ticket
[Guest]: to malls. And she says, you know, if you marry someone who let you watch Shah Rukh movies,
[Guest]: wouldn't that be great? You know, so marriage, the tyranny of marriage in mediating women's
[Guest]: access, and social sanction to access public space, still continues. And Amit, I mean,
[Guest]: it's not just women in rural Rampur. I mean, you look at me, and I've been mentioning this
[Guest]: example constantly while I've been talking about the book, but I live in a really plush neighborhood
[Guest]: in Delhi, I am extremely well to do in the economic pyramid of our country. But even for me,
[Guest]: Amit, to find a house on my own without being married is hideously difficult. I mean, it's it's
[Guest]: not easy. There are all these, you know, conversations, lots of grumbling. This is true
[Guest]: for women and friends of mine in Bombay and many other cities in the country. What always surprises
[Guest]: me is how internalized the lack of female agency has become that we don't even talk about these
[Guest]: things that much. We're not out on the streets protesting any of this, right? I mean, we protest
[Guest]: when comedians say things that are just innocuous, and actually don't even say things that are
[Guest]: innocuous. And, you know, we get upset about those things. But but the sheer lack of freedom
[Guest]: that women have, I just don't see anyone getting really agitated and angry about it. And I'm
[Guest]: really angry. I think you find that anger in the book. But I just, I don't see that you're right,
[Guest]: the tyranny of marriage and the tyranny of motherhood. And to me, these are scripts of
[Guest]: womanhood. There's a kind of Indian womanhood that has just been reified and constantly
[Guest]: affirmed again and again. And all the women in the book, Amit, are all deviating from these
[Guest]: standard scripts in their own ways, the very different ways. And I think the appeal of Mr.
[Guest]: Khan is when you're deviating from these scripts, and you're looking for fun, escape, comforts,
[Guest]: you know, something else, a man who will support that deviation, he's essentially who they find.
[Guest]: I think you're absolutely right, which is I think marriage and the lack of agency is just,
[Amit Varma]: it's an enduring characteristic. And just thinking aloud, you mentioned protesting,
[Amit Varma]: and I just thought that this, you know, we live in a country that wants to lock up Manavar Faruqi
[Amit Varma]: and acquit Mahmood Faruqi. Yeah, that's also an issue. So continuing with the theme of women
[Amit Varma]: working, you also point out in your book, that women working outside the home also face so many
[Amit Varma]: problems, like you've quoted, you know, Senthil Mullainathan talking about the hidden taxes,
[Amit Varma]: I'll just quote that bit out, because I think it's so illuminating. Quote,
[Amit Varma]: the working world is unfair to many women, yet even when they succeed, they must confront another
[Amit Varma]: series of challenges, or their hard won successes are taxed in ways that men's are not. The taxes
[Amit Varma]: I'm talking about aren't paid in dollars and cents, or imposed by the government. They take
[Amit Varma]: the form of annoyance and misery, and are levied by individuals very often by loved ones. I call
[Amit Varma]: these impositions taxes, because it take away some of what an individual earns, diminishing
[Amit Varma]: the joys of success, stop quote. And what you sort of demonstrate so movingly in your book
[Amit Varma]: is that it's almost as if women are condemned to be lonely. They're lonely in the workplace,
[Amit Varma]: they're lonely in the kitchen, as you point out. So can you expand a little bit more on this from
[Amit Varma]: your conversations and your experiences and so on? Just make this concrete for me in terms of
[Amit Varma]: what are these hidden taxes, like one would imagine, like the typical way one would think
[Amit Varma]: about this is that women are working, that's great. It's one step further to empowerment
[Amit Varma]: and to agency and all of that. But it's more complicated. Yeah. And I think that's also why
[Guest]: women are dropping out of the workforce. That's I think that's the contention that I make doesn't,
[Guest]: it can't be tested statistically, because it's a sociological claim, but it's different. But
[Guest]: you know, what's happening is, and this links back to the conversation of how do we tackle
[Guest]: this crisis of jobs for women. And what I really believe listening to all these stories and
[Guest]: following these women for 15 years is that behind the crisis of jobs, there's a crisis of love.
[Guest]: And what I mean by that is that each of the women in the book, any time they try and have their own
[Guest]: bank account, have an independent space, which is completely private to them. Each time they are
[Guest]: asserting something about themselves as an economic agent and economic individual, because there's
[Guest]: something about the market where it really highlights the individuality of yourself,
[Guest]: because it is your labor fundamentally, they are always made to feel unworthy, unloved,
[Guest]: second guest. And there are different ways this is playing out through the book, depending on
[Guest]: your class position and where you are. So for instance, amongst the upper class elite women
[Guest]: that I was speaking to most of whom, in fact, during the time that I knew them, many of whom
[Guest]: just dropped out of the workforce, it plays out in even if you have a maid, even if you have a
[Guest]: nanny, even if you have, you know, cook cleaner, all of that, women are exclusively responsible
[Guest]: for keeping track of what is happening in the household. And I think some economists call this
[Guest]: the cost of keeping track, you're constantly keeping track. And men just aren't expected to
[Guest]: keep track that way. And the statistical data that bears that out, which is in the book that
[Guest]: women just constantly labor on lists and following up and all of those things. Men are not doing that
[Guest]: men are out in the world, and then they come back and they have this clean separation between leisure
[Guest]: time and working time, women are always working. And the other place where this hidden tax on women
[Guest]: plays out is, in fact, in the romantic market, where what I kept hearing from women is that
[Guest]: men are not comfortable marrying, loving, caring for and supporting women who perhaps are more
[Guest]: economically successful than them, or perhaps even their economic equals, that while femininity,
[Guest]: particularly amongst the English speaking elite and upper middle class has changed to the point
[Guest]: that, you know, women expect a Shah Rukh, right, they want someone who will be a partner and a
[Guest]: supporter. Men and masculinity is yet to transform that radically. And you see this playing out in
[Guest]: different ways. So then men lash out at successful women, by either cheating on them, making them
[Guest]: feel bad about their bodies, all kinds of really bad emotional behavior, which makes women feel
[Guest]: very unworthy, you know, about their bodies about themselves about their ambitions. And I kept
[Guest]: hearing from a lot of very successful women, and I'm one of them. In fact, I think my chapter in
[Guest]: the book is a very is an illustration of this, which is that you will be made to feel bad if
[Guest]: you happen to have a professional identity, which you even display and wear. I mean, it's not like
[Guest]: you're showing it off. It's just something you wear. And I was told by people I was with that
[Guest]: you better just hide that don't talk about your work. Men are supposed to talk about work. So I
[Guest]: think those are the hidden taxes and sort of the upper crust in that milieu. If you look at the
[Guest]: hidden taxes when it comes to sort of this emerging trader caste, middle class, right,
[Guest]: there are women in the book like that a woman who decides to pursue a career in government,
[Guest]: despite the fact that her family just wants her to get married. I mean, marriage is the only thing
[Guest]: that her family believes she can do with herself. And she believes actually, she can do accounts,
[Guest]: and she can do government accounts, and she loves doing them. She finds such joy in them.
[Guest]: I was actually just so moved. And I think I was privileged to just know her life because
[Guest]: how much her immediate cousin's father just would ignore her professional achievements to the point
[Guest]: that you know, she once said to me, and I write about this in the book that I would like to talk
[Guest]: about what I'm doing at work, but everybody makes me feel like a bit of a show off if I do. So I
[Guest]: just stay quiet. And we talk about Shah Rukh and films, right. And the other place in her life
[Guest]: where these hidden taxes are playing out, Amit, is she's earning a lot of money, she's earning
[Guest]: more money, in fact, than many of the other male cousins in her family are. She buys one of the
[Guest]: cousins a bike, because you know, he needs it. And they hide the fact the family hides the fact
[Guest]: that it was her and her money that it was a gift. And her family tells her No, if we announce that
[Guest]: it was your gift, it won't look good that a girl is giving this gift, you know, the girl is
[Guest]: essentially supporting financially. And so you make someone's successes feel so small. And I
[Guest]: think she desperately in her life wanted someone. I actually think this is why she actually
[Guest]: participated in my project. I really do believe this. I think she enjoyed talking to me because
[Guest]: she felt that I was validating some of her decisions. Because I was a stranger. And I was
[Guest]: a stranger who had certain credentials that she did respect. And she felt that she needed someone
[Guest]: to tell her that valuing accounts over the marriage market was a valid way of being.
[Guest]: And no one in her immediate family was doing that. And I think that's, again,
[Guest]: sort of a hidden tax that is only and these are taxes that are only imposed in our interpersonal
[Guest]: domain, right. And when it comes to I think, low income communities, you know, what we call the
[Guest]: working class, then the taxes are hidden, but they're not that hidden, because it actually
[Guest]: plays out as sheer violence. And it's in the book, where, when men start to drink, they are
[Guest]: uncomfortable with women being out, there's this constant fear that she will run away with another
[Guest]: man, a lot of mocking. And not only that, what's fascinating to me is even the largest labor unions
[Guest]: in the world, I talked about this in the book, when they unionize, many of them want families,
[Guest]: and perhaps sensibly so they want men and families to support the decisions that women are making.
[Guest]: And in these communities, families are almost letting women work out of sheer dire need. So I
[Guest]: think this goes back to that conversation of the income effect, right? So there's this big grudging,
[Guest]: well, we let you go do this job, but we're not very comfortable. And we constantly watch you.
[Guest]: And there's this constant surveillance. But I think there the taxes play out just very directly
[Guest]: in economic taxes on women, how much they will earn if they don't have a man with them.
[Guest]: You can't survive as a single female household, although one of the principal characters in my
[Guest]: book does. And it's a really remarkable story of the sets of negotiations that she has to go
[Guest]: through to do that, and how she earns her own money. And you have to negotiate violence. And
[Guest]: violence was just seen as such an accepted way of life. And in some of these neighborhoods that I
[Guest]: was visiting that I really didn't, I didn't know how to get my head around it. To be honest, I
[Guest]: think the only way I could do it is to just write faithfully what was told to me without
[Guest]: without adding my own analysis or adding anything that I had to say, because it was just so telling
[Guest]: that it was just something you had to live with. Or if you chose to run walk out of your husband,
[Guest]: you better have economic resources to walk out of a violent marriage. And I think just to end
[Guest]: there, Amit, which is that yes, so these hidden taxes are playing out in different ways across
[Guest]: class groups is that when we think of intimate relationships, we don't recognize that actually,
[Guest]: so much of our economic decision making is occurring and being mediated through intimacy,
[Guest]: right? Because you don't want to do things that your loved ones will not support you in doing.
[Guest]: And one of the things I realized when I was talking to all these women was, you know,
[Guest]: when we talk about gender discrimination, we're always talking about the other, right? So it's
[Guest]: the bhakts, the dented, painted, no, all it's always the other. But I wrote this book out of
[Guest]: this book out of the sheer frustration, because actually, I realized the problem is all with us,
[Guest]: it's number one, what women as themselves can expect and will push themselves to expect from
[Guest]: people, will you stand up for yourself? I mean, will you stand up for what you really want to do
[Guest]: for yourself? And then in your daily lives, the people who claim to love you and who do love you,
[Guest]: but you realize that in very strange ways, we're all very violent to each other and to ourselves.
[Guest]: And that plays out in the way we're engaging with the market, because so many of the women
[Guest]: just felt that they would not be supported if they decided to pursue what they professionally
[Amit Varma]: wanted to pursue. So a couple of things struck me about what you just said. And one was the notions
[Amit Varma]: of love that drive this. And the other was that you said that the accountant was actually happy
[Amit Varma]: to speak to you, because in a sense, it gave her validation that the sort of things that she was
[Amit Varma]: the sort of things that she was talking about, they were not unique to her, that they were valid,
[Amit Varma]: they were legitimate. And that brings me to the question of how do we understand the world we live
[Amit Varma]: in? Right? And you and I being elites, you know, growing up the way we did, you know, we're reading
[Amit Varma]: a lot of books, we have access to the best media, all of that. We have so many ways to understand
[Amit Varma]: the world so many ways to build frames of seeing, but not everyone is that privileged. In fact,
[Amit Varma]: most of the country doesn't have access to most of those frames, for no fault of their own. And
[Amit Varma]: that brought me to this quote of yours, where you write about love and how Hindi films show love,
[Amit Varma]: where you write, quote, despite the intensity of their passions, you will never truly understand
[Amit Varma]: why people in Hindi films love each other as much as they do. Love is youthful and naive and popular
[Amit Varma]: Hindi cinema, it becomes an attribute or a noun, not an action or verb. In these images, it is an
[Amit Varma]: innate immutable feeling within a person catalyzed by another not a series of ever changing interactions
[Amit Varma]: between two ever changing people. In the standard Hindi film format, love usually leads to marriage
[Amit Varma]: and sex, stop quote. And this is like you point out, it's a limited view of love. And it's
[Amit Varma]: understandable if this view of love should prevail. Because that's it, that where are they getting
[Amit Varma]: their knowledge of the world from they're getting their knowledge of the world from the limited
[Amit Varma]: lived experience around them. And from Bollywood? Yes. Do you think that number one that this is
[Amit Varma]: understated? And I wouldn't say that the causality goes one way, the causality may even go the other
[Amit Varma]: way that films are, of course, a reflection of what society wants, and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And it could become a vicious circle in that sense. But is this also why Shah Rukh in a sense,
[Amit Varma]: Mr. Khan, in a sense, is it's so important that at least at some tiny levels in terms of being
[Amit Varma]: kind to women and being in the kitchen and talking to them like they are normal people,
[Guest]: he's a little bit of a step ahead? Yeah, I think two things. And this actually,
[Guest]: funnily goes back to almost where we started, which was about power, right? And in fact,
[Guest]: that line that you just quoted is heavily me thinking about the writers I was talking about
[Guest]: in the beginning, be it Eric Fromm, people who theorize about love. And I think what's happened
[Guest]: is, we've all become in sadly, commodities and love has become transactional. And I end the book
[Guest]: essentially by saying that the reason why women in our country are so exhausted is because we're
[Guest]: constantly hustling for love. I think men are hustling too. They're hustling probably much more
[Guest]: for money than they are for love and for a kind of status that men are supposed to have. That's
[Guest]: the script of masculinity. Women should have love and they're hustling for it, be it what they're
[Guest]: doing to their bodies, the constant compromising, the constant negotiating, the constant settling,
[Guest]: right? And in this current framework, love has become especially for men, and even within
[Guest]: families has become power. So love is I control you. So I love you. I allow myself to be controlled
[Guest]: by you. So I must love you as well. It's this very strange, codependent, power centric notion
[Guest]: of what love is. And in that world, the love that we are seeing all these women seek, it's almost
[Guest]: like they're being taxed for saying, well, I don't want that kind of love. I just want to love who I
[Guest]: am at work. I love myself. In a way, that's actually what all these women are doing. They're
[Guest]: choosing to love what they want to do with their bodies, their hearts, their minds. And I think Mr
[Guest]: Khan is very powerful, because in a way, what he says is, you are fine the way you are, I will love
[Guest]: you the way you are. And by women finding money and their own free time to watch something that
[Guest]: gives them pleasure, which is Mr. Khan, they are saying I love myself. So it's both, right? So it's
[Guest]: yes, you're right, which is that it's his imagery of being in the kitchen, talking to women,
[Guest]: listening to them. But also fandom being an economic act, the fact that these women are
[Guest]: spending money the way they want to, to see something that they want to, to see an actor
[Guest]: that they enjoy watching. It's also a way for them to say, well, it doesn't matter what my family
[Guest]: thinks. And many families, as you know, are very uncomfortable with fandom for Mr. Khan,
[Guest]: because it signals all these things about female sexuality, and people think it's silly. But the
[Guest]: fact that these women just said, well, to hell with it, we want to just watch him and we will,
[Guest]: it was also an act of self love. So it's both. And I think that's why he's important.
[Guest]: On the broader conversation around, you know, where are we in the state of love? And I write
[Guest]: about this, which is, I think, the one place where the economy or economics should not be,
[Guest]: we now have become all hyper rational economists when it comes to love, I actually, I write about
[Guest]: this. And what I mean by that is, we are constantly loving people conditioning it based on what it
[Guest]: does for our welfare. That is actually now what the state of love not only in our country,
[Guest]: I think globally has become. And we love people for the parties they take us to, we love people
[Guest]: for what their body signals about us. We love people for status, we love people based on CVs,
[Guest]: we love people for all these, there are lots of conditionalities, we love people if you behave a
[Guest]: certain way. And I think for the women in the book, all of them were being told, we will love
[Guest]: you more as families, as men, as husbands, as fathers, mothers, whoever, if you conform to
[Guest]: this script of womanhood, that is acceptable to us, which is you either, you know, you don't go
[Guest]: work outside for so many hours, you may be work an hour, but mostly you spend your time on ritual,
[Guest]: on on caregiving, on marrying someone that we tell you to marry. And all of these women
[Guest]: are victims of this new kind of conditional commoditized culture of love, where they are
[Guest]: constantly being told you have to behave a certain way to earn it. And, and if you don't,
[Guest]: your own worth is questioned. And so you feel bad about yourself and you feel bad about the
[Guest]: shape of love that you're receiving. And I think Mr. Khan, there's this kind of existential
[Guest]: loneliness, honestly, Amit, and you know, philosophers have been talking about this
[Guest]: forever. But I think it's become very acute. And it's very acute in the stories in the book,
[Guest]: because these are truly women on the surface, you would think it's a very banal thing to just
[Guest]: want to watch a movie want to just go and you know, giggle at an actor want a mobile phone
[Guest]: want a job. It sounds very like there's nothing revolutionary about any of this.
[Guest]: But what I realized when you actually start to listen and pay attention to these stories is
[Guest]: each one of them is essentially saying we are not happy with this current culture of love that
[Guest]: expects us to constantly condition ourselves a certain way and behave in certain ways to deserve
[Guest]: love. We should just be loved irrespective. We should be loved for who we are and what we want
[Guest]: to do. And we shouldn't be taxed for it. And so I think there is an existential loneliness in our
[Guest]: culture right now. And different cultures then find different ways of dealing with it. The women
[Guest]: I follow, including myself, turn to Mr. Khan as sort of relief as respite. And then we also turn
[Guest]: to ourselves. And we're trying to navigate this culture right now that we have in this crisis of
[Guest]: love. And he then because of his imagery is a great conduit and a foil for that, right. But
[Guest]: there are others who would turn to some other forms of art, I do believe I think this is actually
[Guest]: the function of art, given that we have just destroyed the state of love to the point that
[Guest]: I don't know where we recover, where we recover that concept from, to the point that, you know,
[Guest]: so many people will tell me with the only place which is, you know, pure love is between mother
[Guest]: and the offspring. But even there, I would contend, it's look at what's happening, it's again
[Guest]: becomes so conditional, you behave, you are successful x way, I love you a certain way,
[Guest]: I love you based on x, y, z. And I think all of us just want an out from that. So some people
[Guest]: listen to Beethoven, and some people watch Mr. Khan. And I think the book is essentially a study
[Guest]: of that existential loneliness that this culture of hustling for love is creating. And sadly,
[Guest]: the economy is not helping. In some cases, it does, because there are stories that actually
[Guest]: what happens when you say, well, I will just create my own community. So there's a character
[Guest]: in the book called gold, who's an in-flight attendant, who runs away from her family,
[Guest]: because she realizes that they will never love her for who she really is. And she decides that she's
[Guest]: just going to go do what she wants to do. She feels extremely lonely. I think it's one of the
[Guest]: chapters a lot of people have told me I've had calls from people saying that they've cried while
[Guest]: they've reading it, because it is a I can sense it. And I think it's because of the way she told
[Guest]: the stories to me and my relationship with her. We have, we were very close and we are very close.
[Guest]: And I think that when you see her story, what's happening is there the job, the service sector,
[Guest]: the fact that these jobs opened up and they were very well paying. She works for an airline,
[Guest]: which is a good recruiter, they are, you know, good about social security, she feels
[Guest]: stable somewhat. And as a consequence, she's able to love herself. And so the economy can help in
[Guest]: funny ways, right? Like you a job can help you love yourself and your family won't, you'll feel
[Guest]: meaningful there. You might meet someone through your job who will make you feel loved, you may
[Guest]: feel loved. I mentioned this in the book being an aid manager for files than an unpaid manager
[Guest]: of dishes in your family. But I think each of the women is just responding to this culture of
[Guest]: constantly having to haggle for love. And I call it laveria. I mean, this is a new kind of laveria
[Guest]: that we have right now, not Shah Rukh's laveria. And I think the solution to that is part escape,
[Guest]: which Mr. Khan provides the women in the book, and partly it's yourself and resolve within.
[Guest]: And I think each one of the women is just demonstrating that in her own ways.
[Amit Varma]: So before we get back to the economics, one more question about love. But before that,
[Amit Varma]: an aside, you mentioned that even the love between a mother and a child may not be quite so pure. So
[Amit Varma]: I recorded a superb episode with Mrinal Pandey yesterday, which will probably release after this
[Amit Varma]: because it's more timeless. But there's this little snippet from her book, which I read out and we
[Amit Varma]: discussed that where she talks about how she was with a bunch of her woman friends. And they read
[Amit Varma]: this news piece about this mother who murdered her third born or fourth born in the hospital
[Amit Varma]: after giving birth. And then she and all her friends started discussing whether they ever
[Amit Varma]: felt like that. And each of them was confessing that, man, there was a time when I really wanted
[Amit Varma]: to murder my child, each of them. And just today morning before coming to the recording,
[Amit Varma]: I was discussing this with one of my hosts where I'm staying in Delhi. And she said that, yeah,
[Amit Varma]: that there was a time where at one point, my mother-in-law and I looked at each other.
[Amit Varma]: And she said to me, you feel like throwing him in the dustbin, don't you?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, she said, yeah, I do. Yeah. So but my question about love is this,
[Amit Varma]: which is a difficult question, because I couldn't possibly answer it. So it's unfair. But I wonder
[Amit Varma]: what you think of it. And it's a two part question, which is that you spoke about how the nature of
[Amit Varma]: love is changing and we love for different reasons. So number one, is love always transactional?
[Amit Varma]: And number two, the second part to that is that if so, is it then the case that all
[Amit Varma]: we are aspiring towards is changing the nature of that transaction?
[Guest]: I think it depends on what you actually think is the end goal of love, to be honest,
[Guest]: I mean, if there is an end goal. So for instance, you know, there's a body of work,
[Guest]: which is religion, right, which just says that we should love all I mean, in a very funny way.
[Guest]: And then it tells you that there is this one, you know, way of loving and it's very prescriptive.
[Guest]: So in a way, in fact, people, why do people love religion, they love religion, because it gives
[Guest]: them very clear markers of how to live. And if you live x way, you will be loved, right, you will be
[Guest]: loved by someone or the other mystical forces, people around you, the structures of religion,
[Guest]: I think families have their own versions of that. One of the most horrifying pieces of art I saw
[Guest]: recently was this documentary on the murders in Delhi, where it was the Burari killings, I think,
[Guest]: if I'm not mistaken, it's a Netflix documentary. The name is escaping me. But essentially, it was
[Guest]: essentially the family was following an occult practice where they believed the male head was
[Guest]: channeling the dead father or patriarch. And then at some point, they basically committed mass
[Guest]: suicide. And it is a horrifying, stunning documentary. But if you watch it, one of the
[Guest]: things you realize is that even in families, what was the structure, the structure was,
[Guest]: if you adhere to this belief, we will all love you, and we will take care of each other, right.
[Guest]: So if the point of all of this is material security, feeling stable economically, which
[Guest]: we should remember in our country, which is so economically harsh for most is a very important
[Guest]: goal to have, then in that case, love will always be transactional. So it's it's linked to our
[Guest]: finally into our economic circumstances, right? Because the more difficult life is materially,
[Guest]: how will you then move beyond a transactional love because you're always tied to having to
[Guest]: find love so that someone will take care of you when the state and market won't right now.
[Guest]: And I think that's a comment on where we are. I think there's another kind of love,
[Guest]: which perhaps operates amongst people who have those privileges of certainties, right,
[Guest]: that they can life can be stable people like me, where then I think the real question you have to
[Guest]: ask yourself is, it's a question of, you know, if you want love, which is a love that helps you grow
[Guest]: as a person and as a person who then is a sentient being in the world,
[Guest]: then marriage is perhaps not the way perhaps for that, you know, that you may have to then
[Guest]: explore very different ways of living your life. I mean, and I don't I don't know whether being
[Guest]: single is a way to do that, but I think there are different ways people can come to that.
[Guest]: But I do think that what's happening in our current culture is that we have really conflated
[Guest]: even amongst the elites who have the privilege of certainties. We have completely conflated love
[Guest]: with this idea of power, of status. I think Amiya Srinivasan has this and it's just a wonderful
[Guest]: book of essays, Right to Sex, I think everybody must read it. She says that are our desires
[Guest]: mutable? Are we constantly just mirroring what society wants us to aspire for? Or are we able
[Guest]: to actually disengage and think critically for ourselves? And her answers are not a little bleak,
[Guest]: because actually what you realize is that we're all so socialized. But I think that's changing.
[Guest]: I mean, you look at, you know, the queer movements, non-binary people, I think people are
[Guest]: questioning scripts of love and what love entails. But I would argue, Amit, and maybe it is a bit
[Guest]: depressing to say it, and I hate to be the, I don't want to be gloomy, but I want to just say,
[Guest]: this is actually a fact. As long as our country continues to be as unequal in the economy works
[Guest]: the way it does, where most people in the country live lives of complete uncertainty and you need
[Guest]: and you need material security, particularly women, because they cannot be materially secure
[Guest]: on their own, love will be transactional, because you will constantly rely in interpersonal
[Guest]: dimensions, you will constantly need people to love you to feel secure materially. And then
[Guest]: within that, there's, of course, fantasy and escape. And that's a very different kind of,
[Guest]: you know, love, you love yourself in that fantasy, you find love in odd kinds of fantasies,
[Guest]: everybody daydreams, it doesn't matter which economic echelon you come from. So I guess my
[Guest]: answer to you is, love will be transactional, depending on one's material security, and love
[Guest]: will be transactional as long as we conflate it with the status game. And I think we need to take
[Guest]: a deep, hard look at our own personal preferences. And I, in the book, I'm very transparent about
[Guest]: this. Why was I involved with someone who essentially was, you know, had more status,
[Guest]: he signaled something about me in the book, The Gentleman I Call The One, he signaled something
[Guest]: about me. So he made me feel good in that very transactional way. And at the end of the chapter,
[Guest]: I actually write this, you know, he just became a prize, right? For me, I mean, it felt like,
[Guest]: well, I didn't feel worthy. So now I'm with this person. So now maybe I'll feel better about
[Guest]: myself. And then I had to do the really hard work of just keeping myself company and figuring out
[Guest]: what kind of love do I want on my own terms. And I think the more we start to take a step back and
[Guest]: think a bit critically about those preferences, as opposed to entering the rat race for status,
[Guest]: which is often conflated with love as well. I think until that happens, I don't think things
[Guest]: will change too much for this transactional nature of love. So that's my long philosophical.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, but you call yourself gloomy. I object to that because everything is relative. You're
[Amit Varma]: sitting in a room with me right now. No one can be gloomier than me. Like earlier when
[Amit Varma]: you were talking about how women, you know, seek meaning from say a job, a job can make their life
[Amit Varma]: seem meaningful when family doesn't. And I was just thinking to myself that life is basically
[Amit Varma]: meaningless. We all know that we are just choosing our own illusion. So perhaps we're hunting for a
[Guest]: better. Yeah, no, that's one philosophy. And that's a way of looking at life. And then there's
[Guest]: another way, which is well, even in all that churn, and you construct meaning. Yeah, you've
[Guest]: got to assume there is meaning even if there is none. Yeah, no, I mean, or that meaning is
[Guest]: something it's for you, right? And I think that, and it's fine. I think people will find that in
[Guest]: their own ways. And that's okay. What I guess I'm worried about when I talk to younger women,
[Guest]: and even women in their 30s and 40s, is that I really think that we have this and I actually
[Guest]: write about this in the book when I talk about the upper class mating market that it sometimes
[Guest]: feels like you have this world of men with unwarranted self confidence and women with
[Guest]: unwarranted self doubt. I mean, amid the mental health crisis that love is creating for women,
[Guest]: and I get into this a little bit in parts of the book is remarkable. And I'm sure that there is a
[Guest]: corollary to this for men as well. It's just not something that I've studied, particularly,
[Guest]: and there are people who will, and I'm very curious about, but the women I speak to,
[Guest]: because they find this meaning, they've constructed this meaning out of these gender scripts around
[Guest]: love and a certain kind of heteronormative. I mean, the book starts with the line that my life
[Guest]: is heteronormative. Hell, this is a very heteronormative take of what love is and marriage.
[Guest]: And there are people like Paramita Vohra, I was recently on a panel with her, and she basically
[Guest]: said on this panel was about love and sexuality. And she essentially said that, you know, until
[Guest]: marriage is just not as an institution, we just don't dismiss it. This is just going to be the
[Guest]: way it is. But we are we do live in the reality that currently we live in, I can't dive off a,
[Guest]: you know, a deep end where we live in completely different constructed realities. Right now,
[Guest]: we live in a life where there is a tyranny of marriage in the way women's lives are organized.
[Guest]: Some of us try and resist it. I mean, I don't expect that of everyone, because people may find
[Guest]: meaning. But given that these women find meaning in marriage, motherhood, love, given that just
[Guest]: the sheer onus, the burden, the harassment and abuse that all of that is generating. I don't
[Guest]: know whether men, I'm sure men are feeling cut up as well. But I just don't see it as,
[Guest]: at least amongst the elite. I just see a bunch of men feeling very good about themselves and
[Guest]: then pretending to be brash when I think they're just trying to cover up insecurities. And I don't
[Guest]: think they suffer as much in love as I think women are right now. But that's my contention.
[Amit Varma]: Okay, I'm allowed one dad joke per episode. Go for it. Here's my one,
[Amit Varma]: that if the one was actually cut up, what would it be? You know the answer. Come on.
[Amit Varma]: Two. The two. Anyway,
[Guest]: so actually depends on how much you cut him up. Although because he gave me, he allowed me to
[Guest]: write about this, I would not want to be cut up. Okay, we'll spare him the cutting up. And I love
[Amit Varma]: that sentence of yours about how the upper class mating market seem neatly divided between males
[Amit Varma]: with unwarranted self-confidence and females with unwarranted self-doubt, which is superb.
[Amit Varma]: And our mutual friend Shruti Rajagopalan once put up this cartoon on Twitter of there is this man
[Amit Varma]: sitting with a woman and telling her, let me interrupt your expertise with my confidence.
[Guest]: Of course, exactly. And you know, Amit, my God, I write about it in a very sort of
[Guest]: trying to be light in touch when I write about it. But people get very angry when this happens.
[Guest]: I know women who've been on dates and told your business idea is foolish. Your, you know,
[Guest]: what are you doing? Leave your job. From men who barely have jobs. And all the sort of, you know,
[Guest]: and of course, there's the converse of that, which I absolutely abhor, which is anytime a woman is
[Guest]: getting ahead and she has male mentors, oh, there must be something funny going on between the two
[Guest]: of them. Like this constant scrutiny of female success. I just don't see male success ever
[Guest]: scrutinised in that manner. It might be scrutinised a bit the way, you know, about nepotism, but not
[Guest]: in like questioning a person's character, right? You inherit something from your family, you
[Guest]: inherited, men do and women do, all of us do. But women's success, especially when they're then
[Guest]: showing up in romantic encounters, the kind of nonsense that you just have to deal with. And
[Guest]: I think, you know, in 2021, surely this should be retired. But it isn't. I do believe, Amit,
[Guest]: we are in a crisis of, there is a deeply wounded masculinity because, and in fact, Mr. Khan's
[Guest]: films recently seem to echo that, you know, he's playing these really narcissistic men who are
[Guest]: very worried about the fact that they've fallen for women who have higher status than him. And I
[Guest]: think my sense is when I talk to all these women in the upper class mating market, the stories that
[Guest]: are in the book, my own experience is that I think men are yet to actually adapt to the fact that
[Guest]: there is now this new generation of extremely confident women who can do potentially without
[Guest]: them. Because again, the economy has allowed them to do so because their parents have done well,
[Guest]: they may be able to find land to just live on their own in small enclaves, it might be possible
[Guest]: for you to live as a single woman. And the fact that these women are very vociferous about what
[Guest]: they expect from men, I think is a big shift. And I think men are still struggling en masse to be
[Guest]: able to deal with that. And I think the stories in the book are illustrating that a bit.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I read an interesting essay, I'll try and link that if I can find the link from the
[Amit Varma]: show notes about how, you know, this has actually been measured this crisis in confidence among
[Unknown]: women. Like I think there was some study where, you know, within an organization,
[Amit Varma]: people were asked to apply for a particular position. And there were 10 prerequisites for it.
[Amit Varma]: And no woman applied unless she met all 10. But men, if they met even six of them,
[Amit Varma]: happily, they are applying. And the gap just keeps on increasing as this kind of happens.
[Guest]: And in fact, Amit, I would contend that this in the romantic area, I mean, you're talking about
[Guest]: the professional arena. In the romantic arena, this is even more remarkable, because I write
[Guest]: about, you know, supermodels being made to feel bad by, you know, men. I don't want to make comments
[Guest]: on the way people's physical appearances are, but like a man giving a supermodel a hard time about
[Amit Varma]: You wrote it in his book, he was 5 foot 2.
[Guest]: Yeah, this is for people. And then it's, it's just remarkable to me, the confidence with which
[Guest]: so many men and this I will, I will keep, of course, nuancing this, which is this is men very
[Guest]: much typically upper caste, upper class, I can't say what's going on in sort of different communities,
[Guest]: I'm looking forward to books that do and research that does. But the mating market that I know so
[Guest]: intimately well, and the mating market that gold, one of the characters in the book is occupying,
[Guest]: it's a men's market. And it's quite remarkable that it's a men's market. I think Mukul Kesavan
[Guest]: had that hilarious essay, right about the ugliness of the Indian male. I would actually I think John
[Guest]: Abraham has has ended that because he was talking about the ugliness of the Indian actors relative
[Guest]: to a Madhuri Dixit or so on. But I think once now men in movies are actually probably as sort of
[Guest]: aesthetically pleasing as objects as well as women, I think they're now quite equal.
[Amit Varma]: But Indian men are actually much worse looking than Indian women. It is true, right?
[Guest]: I'm not going to I'm not going to participate in that claim because Shah Rukh Khan is an Indian
[Amit Varma]: man. So he's an outlier. But I you know, I don't want this is this is actually this is not the kind
[Guest]: of statistic. I will not adhere to or abide by, I would believe in a complexity here. But what I
[Guest]: will say is that the confidence is quite remarkable. And the lack of confidence that girls are growing
[Guest]: up with is just something that, you know, and I face it, all the women in the book face it,
[Guest]: you're constantly made to feel unsure about knowing yourself. And, you know, we were we
[Guest]: started this conversation, we're talking about people who hide from themselves, right.
[Guest]: And I think women are almost socialized as they're growing up to hide from their own desires,
[Guest]: conform to a script that will earn them security status survival. And that takes very different
[Guest]: shapes based on where you are and your circumstances. It really worries me that
[Guest]: this is now unfortunately, this crisis of confidence is just it seems to just get compounded
[Guest]: professionally and romantically. There are studies that measure depression rates and
[Guest]: suicide rates amongst women. And there's some India has one of the global highs when it comes
[Guest]: to some of this, and I quote some of the data in the book, and it's a tough one to crack through
[Guest]: policy. I think that's where I'm really struggling when I hear these stories. And
[Guest]: I think the book is essentially trying to communicate these experiences to just a larger
[Guest]: public. But then how do you start to resolve them is think is a very tricky ask, because I think a
[Guest]: lot of it will perhaps require women to exit some of the structures that are incentivizing them to
[Guest]: just conform. And I don't know whether the economy and public space currently will allow for that.
[Amit Varma]: So I have, again, a deeper question coming from this observation about,
[Amit Varma]: you know, in your book, you made this observation about how you went to talk with a bunch of women,
[Amit Varma]: but they weren't saying anything, and they were all clammed up, and there were men around. But
[Amit Varma]: when the men leave, then they start talking, which indicates that there was one persona they
[Amit Varma]: were maintaining that was socially acceptable in that milieu. And the moment they found that they
[Amit Varma]: could speak, they spoke. But it also seems to me that some of them would have become the persona
[Amit Varma]: in the way a mask can become a face. Yeah, right. And so, in your experience, how much does that
[Amit Varma]: happen? Like how much? Like, on the one hand, I can see some people kind of internalizing all of
[Amit Varma]: this. So they also believe it's okay, they don't have an issue with it that he was right to hit me,
[Amit Varma]: I must have done something wrong. Or, you know, my husband works for the family, I must spend all day
[Amit Varma]: cooking good food for him, and all of those things. But on the other hand, there would be
[Amit Varma]: people who realize that they are trapped, and this is what it is. And they live in Thoreau's words,
[Amit Varma]: lives of quiet desperation. So you know, which of these you think is more prevalent? Are they all
[Guest]: true? They're all true. Although what I have noticed, based on just the stories I know,
[Guest]: and the people I've met, I'm not going to make more of a generalized statement beyond that.
[Guest]: What I have noticed is that there is a class distinction here. I noticed anytime you talk
[Guest]: about a Me Too case, anytime you talk about men treating women poorly, I noticed that
[Guest]: upper class women tend to be much quicker to apologize and explain for men sometimes.
[Guest]: In that there's a lot of internalized misogyny, the boys will be boys, a little bit of bullying,
[Guest]: and I actually mentioned this. And in fact, sometimes Mr. Khan's characters himself,
[Guest]: and certainly the characters Ranbir Kapoor's plays, all of them are like this, which is they're
[Guest]: all these so seemingly charming men. But actually, they're just man children who need to be coddled
[Guest]: and constantly validated and their narcissism needs to be encouraged and cultured in a way.
[Guest]: And women that are constantly in these movies playing the burden of someone who will do that
[Guest]: for these men. There's a scene which I mentioned in the book, which is in Ae Dil Hai Mushkil,
[Guest]: which by the way, is one of my favorite Hindi films. I actually love that film.
[Guest]: Ranbir Kapoor was just fantastic in it. But you know, there's a scene between him and this
[Guest]: stunning Aishwarya Rai. And they've had this encounter, they've slept together. And then
[Guest]: the next morning, I think they're trying to figure out where they stand. And you know,
[Guest]: he asks for her poetry, because he's a musician, she says, sure. And then she turns to him and she
[Guest]: says, well, if I give you your poetry, and I get you, you know, you're sort of recovering from a
[Guest]: heartache, and I'm helping you with that. What do I get in return being with you? And he pulls
[Guest]: her towards himself and says, am I not enough? And I think what's happening is this am I not
[Guest]: enough is seen as charming amongst upper class women that oh, this is a confident man, how you
[Guest]: know, there's a kind of man who's considered charming, right amongst some of us. And actually,
[Guest]: if you look at him closely, he's a bully and a child. You see this a lot. I mean, hushed whispers,
[Guest]: anytime you talk about a Me Too case in India, you will notice there are lots of hushed whispers
[Guest]: coming from women who will say, well, you know, maybe the guy was misunderstood, all that nonsense.
[Guest]: I have no patience for that. And I noticed that amongst largely upper class women, I wonder if
[Guest]: that's because upper class men hold so much power, money and prestige that women are locked into
[Guest]: those networks. And then the internalised misogyny is even higher. I wonder if there's an economics
[Guest]: of this as well could be some people who write about it say that there is, but in working class
[Guest]: communities, Amit, I actually noticed much stronger will and desire amongst the women I know,
[Guest]: to fight, to fight against anytime a woman is told, you know, your place is at the home or
[Guest]: is made to feel inferior. One of my favourite quotes in the book is the daughter of a domestic
[Guest]: worker. The domestic worker's name is Sandhya in the book. She's Bengali, loves Shah Rukh. Her
[Guest]: story in the book is about how she basically buys a television so she can watch Shah Rukh all the
[Guest]: time. And her daughter said to me, her daughter loves Shah Rukh, but she really loves Priyanka
[Guest]: Chopra. And when I asked her, so what do you like about her? And we were talking about her.
[Guest]: She said to me, she said, Well, did you see that she married a foreigner? And she married a foreigner
[Guest]: because no Indian man would ever be okay with a girl as successful as her. And so you see this is
[Guest]: the first generation girl who's gone to school speaks English in her family, living in the slums
[Guest]: of Delhi, growing up, actively articulating and very much encouraged by her mother, because these
[Guest]: are intergenerational things. She's learning all of this, because also what she's seeing around her,
[Guest]: that men are not supportive, and one should talk about that. And she is criticising her brother,
[Guest]: she's an agentic being. And I wonder if it's because they're the gains from being associated
[Guest]: with a male prestige network are actually low now, because men, how much security can men now
[Guest]: provide you in the current labour market that we have amongst working class communities where jobs
[Guest]: are so insecure? I often wonder if this internalised misogyny and almost coddling this
[Guest]: child of a man who treats women really poorly and is abusive to women. I wonder if the desire that
[Guest]: I've noticed to sort of coddle to this man and call him charming amongst the upper classes is
[Guest]: because of the economics of it, because there is there are gains of material security there.
[Guest]: Whereas I think in working class communities where everyone now is in this economic churn,
[Guest]: I wonder if now women are out there speaking out a lot more because beyond physical safety,
[Guest]: which if you can negotiate for yourself somehow through communities, through brothers,
[Guest]: through other kinds of families, maybe you can speak out more because now the gains of sticking
[Guest]: with a man in some circumstances are not as high. And this goes back to why I think women in jobs
[Guest]: is such a critical policy issue, because actually we don't realise it, but women in the economy will
[Guest]: start to fundamentally alter all of these dynamics around love, how you feel about yourself,
[Guest]: how masculinity has to reform, because then women standing on their own two feet can critique
[Guest]: credibly so and can exit harmful relationships and can censure men when men need to be censured.
[Guest]: Right now, I think the economy is not fully allowing for that. And of course, as you said,
[Guest]: the economy is a subset of society is not allowing for that. But I think if the economy starts to
[Guest]: shift, if we had a world in which we suddenly said, and this is a radical notion that I really
[Guest]: abide by, which is that in some jobs were just for women, what would happen then? Because then
[Guest]: families would have to adapt, men would have to adapt, right? This is a thought experiment. I
[Guest]: think about things like that. And I think that that would then change the terms of intimacy,
[Guest]: it would change the terms of that would trigger social change, right? So I think to answer your
[Guest]: question, I felt that this mask and this internalization, I found it much more amongst
[Guest]: upper class women where I think that the economic incentive to do so is very strong.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I agree with you. But I'm wondering if there's a selection bias in play, because obviously
[Amit Varma]: the first people who come to mind are the sort of upper class Delhi liberals who jumped to the
[Amit Varma]: defense of Mahmood Faruqi and Tarun Tejpal and all of those and one immediately thinks of them.
[Amit Varma]: A couple of questions arise from this. And this is really I think we started digressing eight
[Amit Varma]: questions ago. So, you know, eventually maybe we'll come round back to the economy and gender,
[Amit Varma]: which I will eventually come back to. But a couple of interesting digressions and
[Amit Varma]: one is this whole question of adulthood that is anyone truly adult? Like one thing I have
[Amit Varma]: kind of realized is that, you know, I don't know where I read it, but I agree with it completely,
[Amit Varma]: which is that no one's ever really an adult, we're all just winging it. Right? And you wing
[Amit Varma]: it in different ways. It's like I think one of the people you spoke to, you know, encountered
[Amit Varma]: someone when she was in her 30s. And this person said to her, oh, you're still a fan of Shah Rukh
[Unknown]: Khan. What shit is this? I thought you would outgrow that. Yeah. And it's like, why should
[Amit Varma]: you outgrow anything? And equally, all these men who are behaving like big babies, and part of the
[Amit Varma]: reason is probably intellectually still big babies. So do you think there's something to that? Do you
[Amit Varma]: think that, you know, this whole notion of, and this is, of course, not related at all to your
[Amit Varma]: book or to India, but just in general, that, you know, do we misunderstand adulthood at all? Should
[Amit Varma]: we just embrace the fact that we are all struggling to understand and figure shit out and we don't
[Guest]: need to pretend? Yes. But I think that, to me, adulthood is, I sort of see it somewhat differently.
[Guest]: I think of adulthood as this phase in your life where you can no longer blame anybody else for the
[Guest]: choices you've made. And I think the reason why we call some men babies or even some women babies
[Guest]: is that everything that's happening to them is always someone else's fault. You will never hold
[Guest]: yourself accountable for what you have done, right? And the circumstances in your life. And to me,
[Guest]: adulthood is a milestone, perhaps a philosophical one, a psychological one, whatever you'd like to
[Guest]: call it. I don't think it's a ritual. I don't think it's 18 and you're an adult. I think I
[Guest]: became an adult when I started to just own up for my own choices, right? To own and hold myself
[Guest]: accountable for them, for my own wellbeing, as opposed to constantly thinking it was because
[Guest]: of my boyfriend or my father or, you know, these other circumstances. Yes, of course, they shape
[Guest]: what is happening to you, but you are playing some role in it. And I think to me, that is
[Guest]: adulthood. And I think going to that, I feel that we live in a world particularly co-created by men
[Guest]: and women, where I think women are, and anthropologists call this the patriarchal
[Guest]: bargain. Essentially, the idea is that because women know that they need to make sure men love
[Guest]: them enough that they will always take care of them, be it as a son, be it as a husband,
[Guest]: that there is this mollycoddling of men done by women, and women are complicit in it,
[Guest]: where essentially, the man is never really accountable. The woman barely holds him
[Guest]: accountable for his own choices. It's always, oh, you know, something happened at office,
[Guest]: someone else has done something. And so much family drama, if you look at television shows,
[Guest]: right? What is all that family drama showing you? It's showing you scripts of how women will
[Guest]: constantly make excuses for men, because they want to maintain a decent term of relationship,
[Guest]: so that when they're elderly, or when things are bad, a man is insurance, marriage is insurance,
[Guest]: right? Now, in that world, do we ever expect anyone to be adult in the way I defined it,
[Guest]: where you will hold yourself accountable? I don't think so. I don't think the social
[Guest]: terms of it will sustain. And I think for women, it's a strange thing, because you're
[Guest]: seeing, you always see yourself in this constant relationship of dependence and overt dependence,
[Guest]: it's not interdependence, it's not an equal dependence, you will invariably then hold
[Guest]: this other person responsible for your welfare, right? So we do have an equilibrium of big babies,
[Guest]: because our social structures, because of the way particularly the family is set up,
[Guest]: and the way resources and land in particular is set up, it's still in male name. I mean,
[Guest]: while the Supreme Court has made these changes, they're still yet to be fully adhered to and
[Guest]: families have all kinds of ways. I have people in my own family who are taking cousins to court,
[Guest]: because the land is in the woman's name suddenly, and then people are fighting about it, right?
[Guest]: This happens a lot. And essentially, till you don't start changing, I hate to sound like a
[Guest]: good old Bengali communist, but but I guess this is where I will end up where if you don't change
[Guest]: the terms of land asset distribution, how in the world we continue to have these terms of overt
[Guest]: dependence, men will be mollycoddled, women will constantly rely on men for welfare. And we will
[Guest]: have an equilibrium of babies. And I think we're seeing that look at our politics, it is a politics
[Guest]: of big babies pretending to be big men. I think that adulthood, that whole notion of holding
[Guest]: yourself accountable will only happen when you feel that, you know, these terms of dependence
[Guest]: are changing, but that's yet to happen. Yeah, I love your definition of adulthood,
[Amit Varma]: though it is so narrow that very few people fit, but it's better than mine, because I was,
[Amit Varma]: I was practically saying no one can be. So go back to my next question.
[Guest]: I will say one thing, though, which is that, you know, I think the way you meant adulthood in one
[Guest]: way when you were talking about it in the context of Shahrukh, is that there's this like delight
[Guest]: and joy when you're a child, right? There's the delight of wonder, and just, just delight. And
[Guest]: there's such freedom in that. And to me, that's not, that's not a child. I mean, I think all of
[Guest]: us, even into our 40s, we should be delighted, we should be living lives where we are doing things,
[Guest]: and we are with people who delight us. I think it's very important. And one of the reasons why
[Guest]: I think I was able to sustain this project is because Mr. Khan delights me, and I am able to
[Guest]: hold on to that aspect, what you would probably call the child within us. I just think of it as
[Guest]: part of, you know, you can be an adult and still have those sources of complete wonderment and
[Guest]: delight. So I do agree with you when you say, I think if I understood you correctly, there is a
[Guest]: part of this one being curious about the world, being open eyed, being open to experiences,
[Guest]: which I don't think we should only associate with childhood. I think, you know, you can enter
[Guest]: adulthood and still have that. But we need to nurture that now.
[Amit Varma]: No, one, I agree with the delight part of it also. I mean, one of the things I kind of realized as I
[Amit Varma]: went through middle age is that, you know, what brings you happiness is a small joys.
[Guest]: Yes. Right. That's it. Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: That basic delight. But I think what I also meant by adulthood was that there is this notion that
[Amit Varma]: an adult has stuff figured out. Right. And therefore, that leads to this sense of people
[Amit Varma]: posturing that they have everything figured out at false confidence, which actually men have so
[Amit Varma]: much more of. And that at many levels to me is toxic because nobody has anything figured out.
[Amit Varma]: The world is complex. And when we behave like we have things figured out, our certainties lead us
[Amit Varma]: to be judgmental about the world. And a lot of the delight then diminishes. Because I think we can
[Amit Varma]: find delight in every other human being because from every person, we have so much to learn.
[Amit Varma]: But if you're always putting labels on them or tags on them or othering them or whatever,
[Amit Varma]: then just so much is lost. And that's so tragic.
[Guest]: But, you know, actually, it's fascinating to hear you say this. And I never thought
[Guest]: about it this way, which is that often when I was telling people that I was working on
[Guest]: this book project about women who gush about an actor and what that tells us about society,
[Guest]: everybody gave me this really puzzled look. And then they said, but what is this?
[Guest]: This is a child's work. Somebody actually told me it's a child's work. What are you doing?
[Guest]: I think this actually goes to what you were trying to say, which is that I don't think
[Guest]: I would have been able to attempt the book or these conversations if I just assumed that I
[Guest]: knew this feminist text and I knew what the scripts of life were and I've got this figured out.
[Guest]: I think maybe because of heartache, because of Mr. Khan, because of multiple experiences,
[Guest]: sometimes heartache opens you up in a funny way. You're just open to, in the tradition of all
[Guest]: lonely people, you want to find wisdom and comfort in the lives and experiences of others.
[Guest]: So you're very open to the lives of others. And I think in a way, actually, that's what
[Guest]: fandom is. It's this, you know, unambiguously adoring someone in our current civilization of
[Guest]: cynicism and this ironic distance that all of us are supposed to maintain amongst each other.
[Guest]: To say that I absolutely love someone and I don't know them, but I really love what they do.
[Guest]: It's childish to many people. And I know that sometimes when people react to what I'm trying
[Guest]: to do with the book, I could sense that that was initially, you know, sometimes a reaction,
[Guest]: I guess. So I completely agree with you, Amit, I think on what you were trying to say.
[Guest]: I just, I guess what I feel is that we have now, and I think this is going back to that notion of
[Guest]: particularly around the masculine, for men to say they don't know something and for men to say that
[Guest]: they don't have it all together. In fact, women are allowed to break down. In fact, women are
[Guest]: encouraged to break down sometimes because you should not fully know yourself. You should be
[Guest]: a bit scattered, that damsel in distress kind of, you know, that dynamic. But men being saying that
[Guest]: we don't have this, I think that goes back to that crisis of the masculine, right? That you
[Guest]: are supposed to have it all figured out. So I hear you and I agree with you. And I'm glad that at
[Guest]: least as a woman, I'm allowed a little bit of space to be foolish. And I think society is
[Guest]: comfortable with foolish women. In fact, we like it when girls are a little sort of, you know,
[Guest]: like that. But I think had I not been a little foolish and a bit open, this line of inquiry
[Guest]: would never have happened. And it's such a seminal project for my life. And I wouldn't have been able
[Amit Varma]: to do it. And I just... No, thank you for being foolish. And I would encourage all my listeners
[Amit Varma]: to be similarly foolish and go down these roads. Let's get back to serious subjects now. Those
[Amit Varma]: serious but fascinating. So in your book about the accountant, you had this sort of fascinating
[Amit Varma]: story where she talks about how when she was in her second year of college, she goes to see
[Amit Varma]: Mohabbatein. And the thing is, she wins some money in a college academic competition. And she buys a
[Amit Varma]: ticket for the film with that. Then she's being dropped home by a friend and her brother. And her
[Amit Varma]: parents are so pissed off when they see her that they slap her. And one of the things they are more
[Amit Varma]: in, of course, pissed off that she went out in a public space. And they're also pissed off that
[Amit Varma]: she spent the money on something as frivolous as a film. And this was, it's one of those moments
[Amit Varma]: where in all my privilege and my kind of good luck, I have to kind of sit back and think about
[Amit Varma]: this for a moment, that the money that you win from an academic competition that goes to buy a
[Amit Varma]: film theatre ticket can actually be so significant for people that your parents are saying, why the
[Guest]: hell are you wasting this on whatever? Yeah. And it wouldn't have been more than 300 400 bucks.
[Guest]: It was around 1000. But whatever. I mean, come on. Yeah, yeah. That's one thing. And speaking
[Amit Varma]: of public spaces later in the chapter, you write quote, India is busy modernizing for its men.
[Amit Varma]: Women occupy a different experience. As per the India Human Development Survey in 2012,
[Amit Varma]: 80% of India Indian women need approval from a family member to go outside the home to visit a
[Amit Varma]: health center. Three out of five women need permission to visit the local grocery store.
[Amit Varma]: In 2015, only 47% of urban women could go on chaperone to a public space. Even within loving
[Amit Varma]: families, women are always made to account for what they do, where they go, what they eat,
[Amit Varma]: and who they see, stop quote. And a little later, you then write quote, claiming comfort in public
[Amit Varma]: space being at ease with one's body in the company of strangers remains an everlasting hurdle for
[Amit Varma]: Indian women. According to a large scale survey by Save the Children in 2018. Three in every five
[Amit Varma]: adolescent girls felt unsafe in crowded spaces. One in four feared being abducted, physically
[Amit Varma]: assaulted or even raped. If she ventured outside a home. Two out of three adolescent girls were
[Amit Varma]: worried about being verbally abused, stalked or being inappropriately touched in public.
[Amit Varma]: In urban areas, 41% of adolescent girls felt unsafe in local markets, while nearly half feared
[Amit Varma]: using public transport. Only a third of urban women dared to venture out to local markets alone,
[Amit Varma]: stop quote. And I just found it important to read this out because most men simply do not get this.
[Amit Varma]: Like I keep saying that, you know, until a few years ago, I did not realize the experience for
[Amit Varma]: women in public was so different. I can walk out at midnight and I can go for a walk and it's cool.
[Amit Varma]: I can enter a lift and not have to see who are the other five people in it. It's it's just
[Amit Varma]: completely different. Tell me a little bit about what you have seen of this and how much do you
[Amit Varma]: think this is also not just the whole the social pressures in the way our society is, but also a
[Amit Varma]: failure of the state and providing a rule of law and how much do they feed into each other and why
[Amit Varma]: don't do we not take it more seriously because it is women and their places in their home anyway.
[Guest]: Amit, let me start by saying that I'm quite disillusioned with the political will behind
[Guest]: these issues. I mean, even in states that talk a very progressive talk, we're yet to see money,
[Guest]: sustained implementation focus on this. I'm still hopeful, but I'm tired of waiting, I think,
[Guest]: for the state. You know, Urvashi Batalia in the book said to me that all the gains that women have
[Guest]: had, they've grabbed them and then they've held on to them. And I think that might actually have
[Guest]: to this is what's probably going to end up happening to public space. It's going to be a
[Guest]: social movement more than the state that will make things change. Public space played a very
[Guest]: interesting role in the book. I had not expected it to come up as much when we were talking about
[Guest]: watching Mr. Khan's films. You know, typically the first thing that would come up is I don't
[Guest]: have money and all of that and I don't have free time to watch a movie that I want to.
[Guest]: My brother or my husband might. So I won't go. Then a lot of women started telling me these
[Guest]: stories about and in fact, the accountant is not the only one to receive censure to go to a cinema
[Guest]: hall on her own. There's another set of characters in the book who also face similar things.
[Guest]: The cinema hall is seen as a place for masculine leisure, where men take their crude desires.
[Guest]: For a woman to be occupying the cinema hall is quite remarkable and unusual. And there's a study
[Guest]: by Ormax, which Film Companion had published, essentially saying that six out of 10 people
[Guest]: in a cinema hall are men. And so the cinema hall is a masculine space. And I recognize that for
[Guest]: many people who are listening to us right now, that's a bit odd, because that's, you know,
[Guest]: people like you and me, I go to the cinema hall alone. And I actually mentioned this in the book.
[Guest]: And it's so interesting to me because I start the book by being in a cinema hall with someone else
[Guest]: who's of my own class background. And for us, a cinema hall is actually a place for a woman to
[Guest]: just, you know, ease up, it's dark, you watch Shah Rukh, it's like, you know, it's your star
[Guest]: gazing, it's lovely. For all the other women in the book, I started to realize as I was talking
[Guest]: to them and hearing their stories, accessing something that seems so innocuous to me,
[Guest]: like a cinema hall is so ridiculously tough, because it is seen as a place of male sleaze,
[Guest]: largely, and men go there. And also this social sanction of women spending on leisure, how why
[Guest]: are you spending on things that are fun and frivolous, you should save that money for the
[Guest]: good of your family and for other kinds of things, right. And so public space came up in very unusual
[Guest]: ways in the book that even to access fun, you have to access public space. And if public space
[Guest]: is so uncomfortable with women occupying it, if we think of public space is actually a being,
[Guest]: right? How in the world are women going to have fun? And I think the data bears this out. And I
[Guest]: think when it comes to solutions, I don't think the solution is going to come sadly from courts
[Guest]: and judges that seem to be as patriarchal and worried about, you know, the hetero not what is
[Guest]: in the normative way that women behave and all this kind of rubbish that's coming out of courts,
[Guest]: particularly lower courts. And I'm not expecting to be perfectly honest, big scale changes coming
[Guest]: from the police on its own. I think what will start to happen is as and we're seeing this in
[Guest]: some places. So the south is safer for women. Why? Because women are out and about much more,
[Guest]: they're out for work, they're out for ritual, they're out to collect grains, they're out just
[Guest]: participating in public space, treating it a certain way. This is true also of Southeast Asia.
[Guest]: There is no reason why that cannot be true of the north. I don't think you know, people saying is
[Guest]: the north immutable to change? No, I mean, there are parts of Delhi that have changed, in fact,
[Guest]: where I do see women being out and about much more than they used to in the past. And then as women
[Guest]: are out and about, then the rule of law, the state will have to it's almost, you know, this demand
[Guest]: and supply equation, right? As people start to occupy space, then authorities and legal structures
[Guest]: will have to then start to accommodate the needs and shifts that that involves. Right now we have
[Guest]: this odd equilibrium where using the language of safety, and Naila Kabir, in fact, who's
[Guest]: interviewed in the book says this, that she says using the language of safety, we just want to
[Guest]: shackle women. We use that language to say, well, you don't go out because it's so unsafe.
[Guest]: And I think a lot of women, including myself, would risk being out. I take walks at midnight
[Guest]: and there are movements, right? I'm forgetting the name, but there are movements about
[Guest]: occupying space in India, about being out on streets, women, just large groups of women.
[Guest]: I remember after the mass, I mean, in India, only we have things like mob molestation. I mean,
[Guest]: and that term, I'm quite certain has come up first, you know, in South Asia, India. Now we saw
[Guest]: cases in Pakistan. The mob molestation in Bangalore, I remember one year during the New Year
[Guest]: celebrations on a very crowded, popular street in the city. I forget which street, Amit, but
[Guest]: immediately after that, there was a whole group of civil society organizations and just women,
[Guest]: regular women just saying, no, this is our city. We will walk the streets. And so my hope when it
[Guest]: comes to public safety and public spaces is not from institutions of governance. I think it's from
[Guest]: women themselves. And there again, my hope is as markets open late, as jobs maybe trigger women to
[Guest]: be out and about more, the dynamic of that public space will start to shift as well. And I think
[Guest]: that's where my feeling, looking at the data, knowing what I know about what's happening in
[Guest]: the economy and in society broadly, I think here I would actually rely much more on communities
[Guest]: and communities of women who will come out and occupy space. And then I think in response to
[Guest]: that, then structures will have to react and accommodate that.
[Amit Varma]: I think one movement I recall from a decade and a half ago to reclaim public spaces for women was
[Amit Varma]: by Jasmeen Patheja of the Blank Noise Project.
[Guest]: Yes, that's right. Yes, that's exactly. Yes, that's. And, you know, there's,
[Guest]: I think there's a wonderful book also called Why Loiter, which is written by Shilpa Bhatke.
[Guest]: And so when I look at what's going on, I think this is where I really think consumption,
[Guest]: the consumer economy, the market can really play a huge role in shifting social norms, because
[Guest]: if women are out and about taking taxis or are out and about, yes, there will be cases of violence.
[Guest]: It's very unfortunate. And then the state will be called upon to essentially do what is right
[Guest]: and what is required. And I think in India, the current track record of the state and
[Guest]: responding to those claims is quite abysmal. But my view really is that there must be places
[Guest]: and there are, I've seen them, which you do not hear about in the news, maybe because things are
[Guest]: not going grotesquely wrong there, where suddenly women are occupying more space.
[Guest]: It could be fish markets in Bengal. It could be coastal communities in Odisha. I've seen them
[Guest]: where suddenly there are more and more women because the nature of the jobs require now more
[Guest]: women to be out doing the trading and the selling. Men have migrated out to do construction work,
[Guest]: right? The economy is allowing for that. And that shift has happened and it's happened seamlessly
[Guest]: and they are part of space and they are occupying it. And so I really here, I really do believe that
[Guest]: the market and the way retail markets are organized and jobs are organized can really
[Guest]: be a very important catalyst in the way space is occupied and we hold it together.
[Guest]: And the last thing I will say on this is there are economists and sociologists who talk a lot about
[Guest]: essentially counseling for men about how to hold public space. You know what you just said,
[Guest]: being conscious of how easy it is for you to hold space. And I think that's actually a very
[Guest]: evolved view. Many men don't realize that. And there is interest in thinking about can we get
[Guest]: schoolboys to just be more conscious of these scripts and there are curricula around that.
[Guest]: I'm very hopeful with that because I think you start young and I think things start to change.
[Guest]: But the last thing on this that I will say, I don't know if the earlier thing was the last thing
[Guest]: I said I would say, but this is the last thing I will say on this, which is that all the data
[Guest]: from feminist economists, from sociologists, tells us that boys who see their mothers
[Guest]: occupying space and working outside the home, the way they treat women out in public space
[Guest]: is radically different. They're much more comfortable with women holding space with them.
[Guest]: They're much more respectful. There are norms that are negotiated because they've seen
[Guest]: their mothers have to make those negotiations with other men. And they've learned from that
[Guest]: sometimes and they've heard about it. And so again, my faith is in the perhaps such an economist
[Guest]: thing for me to say, but my faith is in the economy where I really think as women start to
[Guest]: participate and not just the economy, but also local politics, community work, as women start
[Guest]: to step out of the home for these different reasons, I hope that even men then start to adapt
[Guest]: in the way they deal with women being in public space because they're used to it. And I think
[Amit Varma]: that will take some time. Yeah, I absolutely agree with you. I mean, it's not just the economy.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, it's society, right? Because economy is a subset of society and you know, the market being
[Amit Varma]: just one mechanism of the voluntary actions of people within society. So I also do believe that
[Amit Varma]: you know, any social change cannot happen in a top down way through the state, it's got to be
[Amit Varma]: bottom up. And you know, even on the subject of kids learning, I think it will happen through
[Amit Varma]: culture, it won't happen through curricula. It will happen through culture and peers and you
[Amit Varma]: know, the films they watch and the music they listen to and all of that coming together.
[Guest]: You know, Amit, there's a bit in the book and I really believe this. There are very few things
[Guest]: that I think are like absolute truths, but I really do think that social change is intimate
[Guest]: and it's incremental. I don't think I know the structures can change very quickly in a flash,
[Guest]: there could be you know, governments that are toppled down, but social change in the way I treat
[Guest]: you because of your identity because of your gender because of who you are. That is an intimate and
[Guest]: incremental process. And I fundamentally believe that to make those changes, we have to start in
[Guest]: our own as you just said, your own interpersonal realm, right? Like who are you taxing people when
[Guest]: you see them treat women poorly? Are you paying your domestic worker enough? What in your immediate
[Guest]: home? What are the practices that you are setting up for yourself? And that's why in the book,
[Guest]: I mean, the book is it doesn't take a macro view, because it's actually extreme. The book is full
[Guest]: of stories, minutiae of people's lives, precisely because I was very interested in this idea that
[Guest]: if you follow people over a decade, what are the incremental changes in their intimate space? And
[Guest]: I'm actually the one thing that has made me very hopeful is each of the women in the book,
[Guest]: they've negotiated a different equilibrium for themselves. And that makes me very hopeful that
[Guest]: yes, as jobs in this case, livelihoods, allow for women to interact with the world more,
[Guest]: there will be changes that then happen for the better through a very messy process.
[Guest]: But there will be changes for the better that allow for them to own more space and to feel
[Guest]: better about themselves, be more loved. And that's an intimate process. And it's an incremental
[Amit Varma]: process. It's an incremental process. And I'd add to that by saying that if the increments compound,
[Amit Varma]: yeah, I think what often happens is that, you know, it's said about futurists or science
[Amit Varma]: fiction writers, and I say it about creators, that we tend to overestimate the short term and
[Amit Varma]: underestimate the long term. Yeah, so there will be no radical change, there will be no revolution
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, suddenly women will be free in five years, and so on and so forth. But I think
[Amit Varma]: that in, you know, change compounds, and so my god, I'm sounding hopeful. This is completely
[Guest]: I'm so happy to hear this. This is fabulous. I've come in and Mr. Khan and I have converted you into
[Guest]: an optimist. But what I was going to say, though, is, you know, this is precisely why Amit, and now
[Guest]: I'll get gossipy a little bit, or maybe complain, which is that I hate all this kind of, you know,
[Guest]: the smashing the patriarchy kind of feminism. Because everything that I have seen and read
[Guest]: and witnessed tells me that social change will not be one noisy smash, I write about this,
[Guest]: it will be a slow melting, it may be very quiet. And I actually contend real social change is not
[Guest]: happening on Twitter. I know that there are hashtags and there's all this stuff. And it's
[Guest]: great because I realized how toxic the internet is for women. So power to women who hold that space.
[Guest]: But social change is happening in places we are not studying. I was very happy the book is doing
[Guest]: well among sociology students. And one of the things I'm really hopeful for, is that I think
[Guest]: we should just go back to doing very traditional sociology. We don't do that anymore. You know,
[Guest]: the kind of work that I'm ensuring we know Srinivasan and others were doing, which is,
[Guest]: you just study homes, you see what's happening, you know, in these local communities. And
[Guest]: there is so much changing. I mean, the patwari wearing jeans suddenly, you know,
[Guest]: there is a lot going on, which we don't document enough and what that means. One of the things
[Guest]: that's very important, at least to me as an analytical prism, maybe for this book, and what
[Guest]: I will do in the future is I think looking at the real minutia of things that seem utterly banal.
[Guest]: Someone wearing jeans is utterly banal. Someone having a job is utterly banal. But actually,
[Guest]: if you start to study it for what it is, someone liking Mr. Khan is utterly banal. It's very
[Guest]: obvious. It's like what is there to study there. But if you start to study that, I actually think
[Guest]: you'll learn a lot more about the big shifts that are happening in our society, much more than any
[Guest]: loud, you know, interaction on the internet ever will. And I'm grateful that at least I had the
[Guest]: opportunities and experiences to be able to do that. I'm looking forward to that kind of
[Guest]: scholarship. I love that kind of work. And the one thing on this, which I will also add is that
[Guest]: the there's a kind of belief I find even amongst my own friends, well intentioned feminism,
[Guest]: which seems to believe that you have to conform that there's a standard script of what a feminist
[Guest]: life is. And that's not true, because all the women in the book, they will not hold up to the
[Guest]: label, because they don't see I don't see feminism as a label as a practice. And all of these women
[Guest]: in their own ways are just fighting for a different reality for themselves. And they're doing it in
[Guest]: ways that may subscribe to feminist scripts may upset feminist scripts, but they are attacking
[Guest]: structures in terms of dependence. And I think our society will be better for it. And I noticed
[Guest]: that in a lot of writing around women, there's like there's this writing that we tend to focus
[Guest]: a lot on the heroes, right? So the big business women, women who really made it and those are
[Guest]: great stories. And then we also tend to focus on victims of brutal crimes, because obviously,
[Guest]: those are very important stories to tell. My interest with this was to look at the missing
[Guest]: middle mean where the things happening and they don't seem particularly interesting on the surface
[Guest]: of it. But I'd like to believe and I hope when people read the book, they find that what's going
[Guest]: on is actually quite remarkable that there's a lot of change happening in places without protests
[Guest]: with a capital P, there are subtle ways in which people are changing norms. And what's important
[Amit Varma]: about the point that you just made, and which I'd love to underscore is that, you know, we should
[Amit Varma]: not go by conventional notions of what is worthy of study or not, you know, the textures of everyday
[Amit Varma]: life, the interior lives of women, you know, what do people feel when they go inside a cinema
[Amit Varma]: theater, and they watch a star come on the screen, all these also reveal so much about us. And that's
[Amit Varma]: kind of one of the areas that you've covered so well. So another fascinating aspect of the book,
[Amit Varma]: for me, is that in a sense, your book contains multitudes, like people often complain about
[Amit Varma]: nonfiction books, that it's one idea, and it somebody published it as an essay somewhere.
[Amit Varma]: And then publisher said, idea is good, make a book, and they make a book. And it's basically
[Amit Varma]: two, three interesting chapters, and the rest is filler. And your book is not like that at all,
[Amit Varma]: because with every chapter, it's like you're adding on layers. So you have that first section
[Amit Varma]: on upper class women, and then you kind of go down the line. And a lot of it is eye opening,
[Amit Varma]: because these social realities also are so different from each other. I'm particularly
[Amit Varma]: struck by a couple of those examples, you say about the working women of Bapu Nagar, quote,
[Amit Varma]: the working women of Bapu Nagar had many theories on men and marriage, a good husband was divine
[Amit Varma]: intervention and sheer luck, even the best man's character would eventually curdle and rot.
[Amit Varma]: Life was tough on men, and they took it out on the women and children losing interest in being
[Amit Varma]: devout, kind and courteous. Women were protected from the harshness of the world outside. So they
[Amit Varma]: remained hopeful and God fearing, stop code. And then you write about the hamlets of Rampur.
[Amit Varma]: For generations, the labors of women within the hamlets of rural Rampur were hidden. Women were
[Amit Varma]: engaged in farming homestead plots and animal rearing as unpaid family helpers. This was in
[Amit Varma]: keeping with the way agriculture was organized in Western Uttar Pradesh. Jobs within farming
[Amit Varma]: were neatly segregated by sex. As Manju explained, anything that needs looking at an animal or
[Amit Varma]: looking down on the ground, we women usually do. Anything that requires looking up at strangers
[Amit Varma]: or going outside the village, the men do, stop quote, I mean, stop her quote. And you continue,
[Amit Varma]: weeding and the cleaning and storing of grains were exclusively female chores. The dictates of
[Amit Varma]: Parda meant that women would only work in their own fields or the fields of their relatives and
[Amit Varma]: nearest neighbors, stop quote. And obviously, to go deeper into all of your observations, I'd just
[Amit Varma]: encourage people to buy the book because everyone should read all of it. But just going to your
[Amit Varma]: experience of covering all of this one, you know, the book is a combination of memoir, reportage,
[Amit Varma]: and sort of analysis backed by data. So there is a certain amount of going out there and talking
[Amit Varma]: to people. And as you earlier mentioned, you're an introvert, not in so many words, but you don't,
[Amit Varma]: you're not, you would agree with me what in my agreement of what Sartre said, hell is other
[Amit Varma]: people. But you actually went out and you spoke to all of these people and kind of made them
[Amit Varma]: comfortable with you and all of that. And so what was that experience like, like, you know,
[Amit Varma]: was it easy for you at first? And also, did you change in the process of doing all of this? Did
[Amit Varma]: you change the way you look at them and the way you look to the world? You know, Amit, actually,
[Guest]: this book happened by accident. So in fact, when and I mentioned this in the book, which is when I
[Guest]: went to Ahmedabad, to Bapunagar and to Rampur, I was in my early 20s, I was supposed to be doing
[Guest]: a survey of women who are working in home based sectors, right, be it embroidery or making incense
[Guest]: sticks at home. And when I started asking them the standard survey questions of wages and working
[Guest]: conditions, these women were just so bored because they were dealing with their economic realities
[Guest]: themselves. And I think to take a break, then we started talking about Mr. Khan. And then that led
[Guest]: me suddenly I, the tone and tenor of these conversations just opened up. And I think what
[Guest]: really helped and I am a recluse is difficult for me. But I think what really helped was that shift
[Guest]: in energy, that suddenly you had all these people who were so bored of, you know, this girl from
[Guest]: Delhi was like wearing kajal with her khadi kurta has come and they've seen now versions of me
[Guest]: multiple times, you know, and there's jokes about that. And I mentioned that in the book, one of
[Guest]: the characters, Manju, she says to me, what you Delhi girls find about being here, I don't
[Guest]: understand. I just love the shift in and suddenly, we all wanted to talk. And it was a very moving
[Guest]: experience for me. And maybe this is why very early on in 2006, I decided I would write this
[Guest]: book because what was moving about it is in a country where I'm always told that I have nothing
[Guest]: in common with my neighbor, we are so different, there are all these lines of division, identity,
[Guest]: so on and so forth. Suddenly, we all had this one person to talk about. And we talked about him in
[Guest]: equal way. How what do you think about Shah Rukh? Let me tell you what I think about Shah Rukh,
[Guest]: right? Suddenly, all those very narrow divisions of identity very briefly, I mean, just disappeared.
[Guest]: And it was just a very exhilarating moment for a young person, young foolish person as myself. So
[Guest]: I changed in that I think those conversations made me a lot more thoughtful about what unites us as
[Guest]: opposed to just the standard scripts of you know, what social science teaches you, right? You should
[Guest]: of course, be mindful of difference. But I don't only see difference. And the experience of the
[Guest]: research was really complicated. Because I often actually say that this was not standard research,
[Guest]: because it's not like I had, you know, specific schedules saying, Okay, I'll come back in six
[Guest]: months or four months. And I followed these women for more than a decade. But each time Mr. Khan had
[Guest]: a release, each time he had a film, then there were festivals, we would talk some of these women
[Guest]: didn't have mobile phones, but I try and reach them. Sometime in 2013, I did lose touch because
[Guest]: I went off to study in Boston, I was not fully in contact with everyone, I came back and when I
[Guest]: decided the book was going to take a certain shape, I needed to go back to seek permissions
[Guest]: catch up on their lives. And in fact, going back, I discovered one woman had run away from her home,
[Guest]: and there was all this churn going on in their lives as well. And so it was very complicated.
[Guest]: And it felt sometimes like it really wasn't research, it was just, you know, I was following
[Guest]: up with friends, if I were trying to meet Shruti, for instance, our common friend,
[Guest]: and she was no longer where she was. And I was trying to find her where she was. It just it was
[Guest]: like that it was just life. And in a way, I think I was just bobbing along these women's lives,
[Guest]: I don't think I was participating in the standard way, an anthropologist or a researcher would.
[Guest]: But then as a consequence, there is a lightness in the way we were speaking to each other,
[Guest]: because it was very open. The process changed me in making me much more aware of our unity,
[Guest]: as opposed to our divisions. It also made me much more appreciative of how precarious people's
[Guest]: lives are. I mean, I knew the data on precarity, I know that our lives are precarious, but there's
[Guest]: something, you know, when you go to meet someone, and she's crying, and she tells you that I'm going
[Guest]: to have to go back to the husband that I do not love at all, because I cannot be somewhere on my
[Guest]: own, and you've held this person's hand. It just changes the way you think about people's lives.
[Guest]: So it's made me very considerate. In fact, a lot of people who meet me, it's going to sound
[Guest]: really strange, but they think that I'm a little too considerate, like I'm a pushover. But it's
[Guest]: okay, I'm happy to be a pushover, because I've now realized that I think we are so privileged,
[Guest]: and people's lives are so precarious, mostly in our country, that you should have some patience
[Guest]: and tolerance for what people are going through. And I think it's really taught me that.
[Guest]: And I think the third thing it's taught me, which I've mentioned time and time again,
[Guest]: is that the power of culture, and the power of popular culture, not just, you know, sort of
[Guest]: niche culture, which is sort of highbrow, but mass culture, because had it not been for Mr. Khan,
[Guest]: the relationships that were sustained between myself and many of the women in the book
[Guest]: just wouldn't have occurred. And I'm very grateful for that, the sheer power of that
[Guest]: popular Hindi film and his icon. And the last thing I'm struck by is how difficult it is to
[Guest]: do research on women's lives, Amit, because none of them ever had time to talk to me.
[Guest]: So even if I wanted to be a standard researcher, and set up a time for an interview,
[Guest]: suddenly you're called, these women are called to deal with kids, something you have to go do
[Guest]: something in the field, irrespective of your class background, this was true across time poverty
[Guest]: meant that it was so difficult for women to just find time to do what they wanted to do, let alone
[Guest]: answer my questions, that I, I really appreciate that when we as privileged women can do whatever
[Guest]: we can with our time. We are I mean, a we're such a minority, and it makes me appreciate my own time
[Guest]: much more because I've seen that it's a true luxury in our country, just having time to yourself.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and time poverty was a phrase I first came across in this book. So to my shame,
[Amit Varma]: and it's such a lovely phrase. It says so much. Yeah. So I now want to ask a question about
[Amit Varma]: language. You make an observation in the book where at one point when you're talking about Manju
[Amit Varma]: in your in your chapter on Manju, you talk about the link between language and agency and you say,
[Amit Varma]: quote, so marriage happened to Manju that year at the disputed age of 20. Those were her words.
[Amit Varma]: She wasn't getting married. Marriage was happening to her. She was simply along for the ride,
[Amit Varma]: a spectator with a front row seat, a stop code. And this reminds me of something Jackson Katz
[Amit Varma]: once said, where he said, quote, we talked about how many women were raped last year,
[Amit Varma]: not about how many men rape women. We talk about how many girls in a school district were harassed
[Amit Varma]: last year, not about how many boys harassed girls. We talk about how many teenage girls
[Amit Varma]: got pregnant in the state of Vermont last year, rather than how many men and teenage boys got
[Amit Varma]: girls pregnant. So you can see how the use of this passive voice has a political effect.
[Amit Varma]: It shifts the focus of men and boys and on to girls and women. Even the term violence against
[Amit Varma]: women is problematic. It's a passive construction. There is no active agent in the sentence. It's a
[Amit Varma]: bad thing that happens to women. It's a bad thing that happens to women. But when you look at that
[Amit Varma]: term violence against women, no one is doing it to them. It just happens. Men aren't even a part
[Amit Varma]: of it. Stop quote. And you know, that link of Jackson Katz was shared with me on Twitter by
[Amit Varma]: one of my writing students. And I'll link that tweet from the show notes. And the discussion
[Amit Varma]: that this kind of led to was the role that language plays, the insidious role that language
[Amit Varma]: plays that when you use language in these ways, you know, you're denying women agency and choice.
[Amit Varma]: And equally, it is as if shit just happened, shit happens, you know, it's not somebody's fault.
[Amit Varma]: How much of this did you, you know, did you notice a lot of this? What are your thoughts on this?
[Amit Varma]: Because, you know, you pointed this out and about Manju saying that marriage was happening to her,
[Amit Varma]: she wasn't getting married. How much of this did you see? And is this something that there is some
[Amit Varma]: kind of class distinction to also? Or do you feel all women are equally likely to think along these
[Guest]: lines? How does one think about this? I mean, I think it depends on the phenomena that we're
[Guest]: talking about. When we talk about marriage, there's certainly a sense. So what she said was
[Guest]: meri shadi ho rahi hai. And it's not like the shadi is happening to me. And that is actually
[Guest]: a way some other people would talk about it. And I noticed that that was actually the way many of
[Guest]: her friends, so many people I knew would would say that shadi ho rahi hai. It's not something
[Guest]: that is happening to me. But that's because marriage happens to all women. It's not that
[Guest]: in a world where only 5% of women are choosing their own partners. Marriage is happening to
[Guest]: everyone. It's you are not actively participating necessarily in that process. You may be but
[Guest]: it's obfuscated. It's a marriage arranged market. And I think around marriage, that use of language
[Guest]: was very passive for women, where, in a way, you realize that this is a rite of passage,
[Guest]: you need to go through this to be able to, as we talked in the beginning to access the world
[Guest]: to do what you want to do, as long as your husband is okay with it, but you need a husband,
[Guest]: he'll confer status and you will be appropriate then. So marriage, I noticed was something that
[Guest]: everybody sort of said it happens, you know, amongst particularly middle class, low income
[Guest]: women, even the way some elite women would talk about their marriages. It was something you were
[Guest]: succumbing to. And I and there's a Rajput woman in the book who comes from a very well to do
[Guest]: background, but she married someone because her father's in debt, and she has to to conform to
[Guest]: what her family expects of her. And it's not a particularly loving marriage. But even the way
[Guest]: she would talk about her marriage, and she's quite posh, the way she would talk about her marriage
[Guest]: was very much as if it was a something she had succumbed to she had given into. So I think this
[Guest]: is true of marriage, everything else, be it Mr. Khan, be it trying to earn money, be it. In fact,
[Guest]: there I noticed, particularly amongst sort of women living very harsh economic lives,
[Guest]: there was this great delight in using the active voice, life is boring, boredom, the word boredom
[Guest]: and boring, I heard more than even I heard the word Mr. Khan, Shah Rukh, because it felt like
[Guest]: inequality was being almost expressed through boredom. Because what was happening was men had
[Guest]: access to public space, men had access to money, so they could go out and have fun. Whereas women
[Guest]: were expected to stay at home and life was boring. And some of the women who are first generation
[Guest]: English speakers, they learned the word boring, and then they spread it around in their villages.
[Guest]: And everybody was talking about how women were boring. And I actually see that inequality was
[Guest]: experienced as boredom for these women. And they were very active in the way they use these phrases
[Guest]: and words, they were the active being this was not something boredom was not happening to them,
[Guest]: they knew that their lives were boring, because boys had more freedom. And they said that we don't
[Guest]: want our lives to be boring. And I think when it came to cultural practices, when it came to fun,
[Guest]: when it came to economic freedoms, the language that was used tended to be far more individualistic
[Guest]: in a in a strange way, because they were keeping themselves and their selfhood at the centre of
[Guest]: what they were trying to say. So it was always I want to watch a movie or I want to do this,
[Guest]: because I quote actually a WH Auden line, which is as long as the self can say I will always rebel.
[Guest]: And I think these were women, first generation women and their families were saying I you know,
[Guest]: I want this and I want that. And this was a part of a new self that they were constructing.
[Guest]: Whereas their mothers were much more their sense of identity was much more based on family and
[Guest]: community. They were always a we. Whereas these girls I noticed, they would always say I
[Guest]: mujhe karna hai, mujhe jaana hai, mujhe mall jaana hai, mujhe shadi karni nahi hai. You know,
[Guest]: there was always either mujhe, mujhe, mujhe. It was very popular and various versions of that in
[Guest]: Bangla as well. But marriage was the place where I noticed that when you think of the language,
[Guest]: which is why I mentioned it the way she did, which is that ho rahi hai, it's not like I am
[Guest]: getting married, you are not, you're complicit, but you're complicit in something that's just
[Amit Varma]: happening to you. Yeah, I think there's a poignant moment where one of the people you meet, I think
[Amit Varma]: maybe Gold, where her marriage is fixed up. And I think a song from DDLJ is playing and she starts
[Amit Varma]: crying. And her mother and sister tell her that listen, listen, we know how you feel. But yeah,
[Guest]: the real world is different. Yeah, yeah, that marriage is not going to always be adventure and
[Guest]: travel. And so many of I think the women in the book think that marriage will be the path to fun,
[Guest]: then access unadulterated fun in the way you want. You can watch TV, you can do whatever you can.
[Guest]: And in Gold's case, she realizes that she's actually being married off to a guy who is
[Guest]: extremely conservative will be very, he will regulate her movement, she realizes that.
[Guest]: And then suddenly she sees Shah Rukh on in London and holding on to Kajol and serenading her
[Guest]: in a city that at that time, Gold thought she wasn't ever going to be able to see. She does,
[Guest]: this is giving it away for the reader. And you should read the book to know how it was a very
[Guest]: sad moment. And in fact, there are moments like this a lot. So even the Rajput woman who I talked
[Guest]: about who's posh, marry someone she doesn't want to. And she says to me, each time her favorite
[Guest]: film is Kal Ho Na Hoon. And she says each time Shah Rukh dies in that film. I remember when I
[Guest]: was told that I was going to get married, and I feel like I'm dying with him. Because I think
[Guest]: that movie came out around the time that she was supposed to get married. And so it's salient for
[Guest]: her. And so I think people just see his image and the contrast of that, or maybe the mirroring of
[Guest]: that in some cases, with their own lives, it's quite poignant for them. And they react to that.
[Amit Varma]: Neurons that fire together, wire together.
[Amit Varma]: Yes.
[Amit Varma]: Isn't it? Yeah. I'm also like, you've looked at sort of the loneliness of Indian women through
[Amit Varma]: the prism of Shah Rukh Khan in a sense. And a larger theme, of course, is how films reflect
[Amit Varma]: society. Like at one point, you write, quote, if India's employment rate helps us track our
[Amit Varma]: economic transformation, popular Hindi film extravaganzas, track our moral transformation,
[Amit Varma]: stop quote. And later on, you talk about how films teach so many women about love, sex and
[Amit Varma]: the world like at one point, even just how someone touches someone, where, you know, you quote a
[Amit Varma]: young lady, a garment worker, say to you, quote, I wish someone could talk to me or touch me the
[Amit Varma]: way he does with Kajol in Kabhi Khushi Kabhi Gum, but it's never going to happen. Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: How do you think films have kind of changed to reflect whatever change there might be? Like
[Amit Varma]: at one level, like, you know, there is this constant argument, what shapes what? And obviously,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the causation doesn't go one way. But there is a certain kind of cinema being made by
[Amit Varma]: vocal elites that doesn't really come from society that is perhaps a little more progressive and all
[Amit Varma]: of that. But otherwise, when you look at films, where do you see those sort of reflections of
[Amit Varma]: change happening? An additional kind of sideways question that is there a chance that someone
[Amit Varma]: looking for an icon like SRK to write about 30 years later, will not be looking at an actor like
[Amit Varma]: Shah Rukh Khan, but a role model who is a young woman who can live alone and doesn't need men
[Guest]: to help with. Yeah, yeah, no, I absolutely yes. Let me first the answer to your second question
[Guest]: is yes. In fact, already now, I have a line in the book and so many women would say this to me
[Guest]: in different ways, which is, you know, Shah Rukh represented their idea of a benevolent patriarch,
[Guest]: you know, a man who would care for them, love them a certain way. But Priyanka Chopra and Deepika
[Guest]: Padukone represent women who love themselves and can love themselves, despite with or without men.
[Guest]: And you know, they've openly so talked about their private lives, and they're so successful.
[Guest]: And so I think that's already happening. I think that shift is very much underway. I think on
[Guest]: cinema and love, there's so much said and written about this, I will essentially focus on two
[Guest]: themes. I think one is, if you look at the way love and I'm thinking about the recent films,
[Guest]: romance films no longer are like the big stay of Bollywood, right? I mean, if you even look at the
[Guest]: multiplex movies that tend to do well, it's no longer love stories. These are all now gritty
[Guest]: scripts about gritty realities. And I actually say in the book that most of the films that we're
[Guest]: seeing are just sympathetic stories of capitalism's male losers, you know, like sperm donors,
[Guest]: unemployed men, all of that. And I think, in fact, I feel that many of the younger actors,
[Guest]: they are not matinee idols, I think the scripts that are given to them are so terrific,
[Guest]: that it's actually the script that is the new matinee idol in India. Now, in that world,
[Guest]: love is a very small element. And in fact, if you measure and I have measured how much women
[Guest]: speak in these films, they don't speak very much. And these are like big multiplex hits,
[Guest]: you know, you could think of a Gangs of Wasseypur, or you could think of, you know,
[Guest]: many of the movies recently that have come out, Pink or any of the others. Actually,
[Guest]: female dialogue is not that significant. And female dialogue on terms of intimacy,
[Guest]: talking about love, talking about sex, trying to decode the sex and love that you're feeling
[Guest]: or having. That's just not part of many of these new multiplex films. They're not interested in
[Guest]: that project anymore. The gangster story barely have any of those scripts. Usually the women are
[Guest]: just quiet, supportive characters or quiet, bewitching characters, you know, who trigger
[Guest]: all kinds of trouble. So I haven't said that they're like the bitch, the bichari or the
[Guest]: beauty. I mean, it's sort of the three, right? And you don't necessarily see much deviation from
[Guest]: that. Now, go back in time to the 1990s. And to Mr. Khan's films, they may seem very regressive
[Guest]: and soppy in a certain gaze. But actually, each one of them have women who are writing poetry
[Guest]: about the kind of man they want their own freedoms. I mean, DDLJ actually starts we should
[Guest]: we should always keep reinforcing this DDLJ actually starts with Simran. She holds the
[Guest]: agency because she is defining the man that she wants to meet an unknown stranger.
[Guest]: She's written a poem for herself. And that first scene, then you see Shah Rukh in the film,
[Guest]: it's actually first you, the audience is introduced to her fantasy. And then you meet
[Amit Varma]: Shah Rukh who essentially concretizes that fantasy. But then it ends when her dad gives
[Guest]: her permission to go. I agree. And I think there I think reams and I get into sort of
[Guest]: how different people see that scene so differently, right? And I see that but
[Guest]: but we should recognize that in these films, women had agency to define love relationships.
[Guest]: Madhuri Dixit keeps a diary and listens to music on her own in Dil Toh Pagal Hai.
[Guest]: Karishma Kapoor has this beautiful scene with Shah Rukh where she's so upset in Dil Toh Pagal Hai
[Guest]: that he's not choosing her. And they have this very awkward conversation about romantic rejection.
[Guest]: Shah Rukh is being rejected in Kabhi Haan Kabhi Naan. He's talking about what it feels like to
[Guest]: be romantically rejected. We're not seeing other than in Ae Dil Hai Mushkil, which is a thing that
[Guest]: came out in 2016. Right? I don't think we've seen those kinds of scripts too much in films anymore.
[Guest]: And so if we're looking to films, and I have an Andy Warhol quote, they're saying that I didn't
[Guest]: know what to do about love. And I wanted to learn about love. So I went to the movies to learn about
[Guest]: love. If young kids are trying to learn about love now, amongst the elite, they can watch,
[Guest]: you know, K dramas, they can watch foreign shows, they can watch Netflix. But amongst working class
[Guest]: communities and low income communities, I don't know where a lot of that is going to come from.
[Guest]: I mean, it's probably social media, I'm not sure. But the films are no longer necessarily interested
[Guest]: in that big project of explaining love or demonstrating love. I think that time seems
[Guest]: to have passed. And maybe it'll come back again. But we'll see. Because the scripts now are very
[Guest]: different. So that's one. Now, the second is, if you think about the terms that are being portrayed
[Guest]: of the love and sex that we see in film, you know, one is still if you look at the big blockbusters,
[Guest]: the mass films, right, and even to some extent, the multiplex films, but certainly in the mass
[Guest]: films, female words and women's voices when it comes to expectations of partners, expectations
[Guest]: of men, and men engaging with those expectations. Other than that one scene I mentioned,
[Guest]: I don't really know very many big box office hits that were pan national box office hits that do
[Guest]: that. I actually think you'll see much more of this in regional cinema. You don't see it in popular
[Guest]: Hindi film anymore. And sex increasingly, and I mentioned this is sort of while earlier love led
[Guest]: to sex. So I think the one thing that has changed now is that sex has been liberated from love in
[Guest]: film. And so you have, you know, the traditional Imran Hashmi film where, you know, sex is always
[Guest]: a way for people to manipulate each other, the sex is consensual, but it's a way for people to
[Guest]: get something to profit from something to trick somebody, you know, all there are all these
[Guest]: stories. And then you have this one depiction of sex, which I really think started with this
[Guest]: film cocktail with Deepika Padukone, where essentially you have people, women who have
[Guest]: casual sex as a shorthand to show how modern or hip or cool she is. But even in that film,
[Guest]: and as many people have pointed out, she's punished for it because you know,
[Guest]: she has a car crash, the boy doesn't eventually choose her, all of that, right. And so I think
[Guest]: if you look at the depictions of love and sex was interesting is while now I think love largely has
[Guest]: is no longer dominant in the stories that we tell in big popular Hindi cinema, I think it's moved to
[Guest]: OTT and it's moved to other platforms. Sex, which is now liberated from love,
[Guest]: is still shown in this extremely transactional way. And then what's even worse is that while
[Guest]: people are having sex, you can show people having sex, any conversation about sex is still taboo,
[Guest]: which is why again, I keep mentioning that scene in Ae Dil Hai Mushkil because I really do think
[Guest]: credit to Karan Johar for, you know, what he did, because in a way that film is one of those very
[Guest]: rare films where people are actually talking about, well, we hooked up and what does that mean? And so
[Guest]: many young people find themselves nowadays in that dilemma, right? Like they're trying to decode what
[Guest]: their encounters are meaning, where is this going? What is it leading to? And they do rely on scripts
[Guest]: of films to sort of mirror for them how to negotiate and have these conversations. But
[Guest]: there's very little talk of that. And while so while we see this proliferation of casual sex
[Guest]: in cinema, there's very little conversation, which actually I don't know what's causing what,
[Guest]: but it's mirroring what's happening in society, because people are having casual sex, and then
[Guest]: men ghost you or girls will ghost and nobody really talks about it. Because any talk about
[Guest]: sex or the sex that is being had, or the terms of love is apparently going to scare men away. And
[Guest]: all of that will happen. And so I think that there's a very strange silence around love right
[Guest]: now in cinema. And I think which is why many of the women that I know in the book are looking to
[Guest]: Shah Rukh Khan's films, because those were films that at least they were talking about some of
[Guest]: these things, they were seeing all of that happen. But that age of big, soppy, romantic dramas is
[Amit Varma]: now gone. So it's almost four hours. And I feel like that's, you know, we could talk for another
[Amit Varma]: four hours. I've so much to talk about. We haven't even discussed any of the individual stories,
[Amit Varma]: which I so wanted to do. But I'll end with a couple of last kind of questions. And one of
[Amit Varma]: them is not really connected with your book per se. It's just sort of a, you know, love is something
[Amit Varma]: that you've sort of looked at deeply, and especially the instrumental nature of love in
[Amit Varma]: this. And I love this quote by, I love this quote by, I love this quote by Iris Murdoch, where she
[Amit Varma]: says, quote, love is the extremely difficult realization that something other than oneself is
[Amit Varma]: real. Yeah, stop quote. And it's so lovely. And it also speaks to Kant's, that's not Amitabh Kant's,
[Amit Varma]: Immanuel Kant's second categorical imperative, that always treat every other person as an end
[Amit Varma]: in themselves and not as a means to an end, right? So not as instrumental, not as transactional,
[Amit Varma]: something other than oneself is real. I feel that I need to remind myself of this time and time
[Amit Varma]: again, because I think all of us are most of the time, really living out a play in our heads,
[Amit Varma]: where we are the central character and everyone else is instrumental. And we get different things
[Amit Varma]: from them, friendship, companionship, sex, whatever, A, B, C, D. And it seems to me that one
[Amit Varma]: way out of this, one way of realizing that we are caught in the Chakra view, as it were, is just
[Amit Varma]: awareness of oneself and awareness of others, where you just sit back, listen to them,
[Amit Varma]: get into their lives, empathize. And you've been doing a lot of that in the process of writing
[Amit Varma]: this. So is this a subject you have any thoughts on? And as a corollary to that, do you feel that
[Amit Varma]: the process of writing a book like this changed you? Do you think you would be a different person
[Amit Varma]: if you were just doing important economics papers, which are elite males everywhere?
[Guest]: I would be a very selfish person. I'm sure I'm still a selfish person. But I think my selfishness
[Guest]: is a bit more in check because of this book. I do think that. I think that I realize through
[Guest]: the lives of the love lives of others in particular, and just the struggles to find
[Guest]: things that are very easy for me, that, as you say, life is complex, it's messy. And I think
[Guest]: these stories just reminded me of that every day through the process of writing it through
[Guest]: the process of engaging with it. And I think it's made me less transactional in my dealings with
[Guest]: people, I'd like to believe. And that's something that I'm I keep holding myself accountable to
[Guest]: part of my adulthood. And I also think that what the book has done is, I have to be honest,
[Guest]: I mean, there are lots of grudges that I was carrying about, you know, feeling ignored,
[Guest]: dismissed, not being treated well by a certain type of person. And I think I just poured all
[Guest]: my grudges as well into this book. And now I emerged somewhat cleansed for I don't know,
[Guest]: the next set of grudges, I don't know that I might I might tackle but but but on a serious
[Guest]: note, I think what I'm trying to say essentially, is that I think it's been a process of,
[Guest]: of letting go of a lot of preconceived notions of a lot of concerns about how will people see me?
[Guest]: And will this be a serious book? And I had to just let all of that go to actually write the
[Guest]: book that I really wanted to write. And I think it's been a process of that kind of transformation
[Guest]: for me. I would like to believe that even for the women who participated in the book, I think the
[Guest]: reason they participated in the book, I often joke, one is, of course, pity for me, because
[Guest]: they felt that no one was marrying me. So they should at least participate in this project to
[Guest]: help me out, you know, so that so that my life wouldn't seem as useless and lonely as someone
[Guest]: who's unmarried, their lives are. But the other reason is that I think we co created just, you
[Guest]: know, a set of frameworks and stories around Mr. Khan that I think many of us are very interested
[Guest]: in. I really hope the book is translated because actually many of the conversations, as you can
[Guest]: imagine, Amit happened in Hindi, I would like more younger people who actually, you know, speak the
[Guest]: language of the larger part of the country, especially where the stories are situated,
[Guest]: where Hindi is actually a dominant language for that Hindi and Bangla. I really hope that happens.
[Guest]: And so I think it's changed me in that it's just I'm a calmer, more less transactional and a bit
[Guest]: less selfish. I mean, I'd like to believe that. And on the question that you asked about
[Guest]: transactions, I mean, in the book, and we talked about this, I think some time ago, I describe it
[Guest]: as a disease. It's the disease of laveria. It is a transactional hustling of love, love in its
[Guest]: truest form, looking at, be it religion, the good parts of religion, be it reading Eric Fromm, be
[Guest]: it Mr. Khan's films, is making peace with the romantic injustice of the world, the world is
[Guest]: unfair, and you will never, you know, find the mate that you want, maybe you're lucky and you do,
[Guest]: maybe you won't always be as desired as you want to be. I think there's this beautiful quote,
[Guest]: I think it was Pico Ayer who said that all pain in life happens when people don't see you the way
[Guest]: you see yourself. And I think love is being okay with that realization that people will never see
[Guest]: you the way you really want to be seen. And loving yourself as well as loving the world in general
[Guest]: is an attitude of generosity where you say, well, that's okay, that I may not be the most desired,
[Guest]: I may not find my heart's desire. But much like Mr. Khan in Kabhi Haan Kabhi Naan, which I believe
[Guest]: is his best film, you just have to hold yourself, do what you need to do and find the small joys
[Guest]: and delights in the world. And to me, I think that is love. That is, I think the exit out of
[Guest]: this transactional hustle culture of love, which is to accept that there is injustice in the world,
[Guest]: there are some injustices you can try and do something about. And then there are some which
[Guest]: seem unfair in the interpersonal domain. And sadly, we all have to make our peace with it
[Guest]: and perhaps create art out of it and make sense of it in our own ways as we can.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And if it's any consolation in the end, it doesn't matter because we're all going to die.
[Unknown]: No.
[Amit Varma]: So that's my, yeah, repudiating the optimist that suddenly emerged a while back.
[Guest]: We should leave it at an optimistic note, which is to say that, well, even if you die,
[Guest]: there are these memories and there is something that you've left behind for someone or the other.
[Amit Varma]: Right. Right. So before I go on to my last question, I just like one aspect of the book,
[Amit Varma]: which I haven't spoken about at all, which we should speak about some other time,
[Amit Varma]: is the writing, because I think the writing is so good, so entertaining.
[Amit Varma]: You've been so vicious to so many people. It's lovely, you know.
[Guest]: But kind to others as well.
[Unknown]: Kind to others as well. You've been kind to the good people. You've been vicious to the bad people.
[Guest]: You enjoyed the viciousness.
[Amit Varma]: I love the viciousness. You were vicious to economists, to academics. And one hidden part
[Amit Varma]: of it is how often you were alliterating so naturally, like, you know, you begin with
[Amit Varma]: heteronormative hell. Then earlier you said, beech bechari beauty. And the book is full
[Amit Varma]: of these really subtle, I mean, it just sounds so good if you read parts of it out.
[Amit Varma]: So if some, you know, there's an audio book of it one day, I'm sure it'll sound good.
[Amit Varma]: And I noted down a whole freaking page of great sentences from this.
[Amit Varma]: I'm just going to read a couple of them out because I want listeners to
[Amit Varma]: kind of pick up your book because it is not a serious, serious read.
[Amit Varma]: The content is serious, but the journey going through it is so much fun.
[Amit Varma]: And these two lines, especially I love one where you quote a friend saying,
[Amit Varma]: in real life, men are sex crazed robots who can barely express themselves.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote. And this goes to your earlier thing about man childs.
[Amit Varma]: But my favorite line is, quote, in Delhi, it is the truth universally acknowledged
[Amit Varma]: that a single man in possession of a good fortune must be busy building his harem.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Guest]: That's my hat tip to Jane Austen. And I think that sadly, this still holds to be true.
[Guest]: I'm convinced, Amit, that my next book will be a drawing room theater of Delhi.
[Guest]: And I will labor in service of that. But thank you for enjoying the book.
[Amit Varma]: So my final question is this, and you will feel that you're not competent to answer it.
[Amit Varma]: I already know that. And you will feel the imposter syndrome.
[Amit Varma]: I think it would be very useful coming from you, which is for young people
[Amit Varma]: who are listening to this podcast, whether they are just whether they are on the one hand,
[Amit Varma]: in fact, let's make it a two part question.
[Amit Varma]: On the one hand, if there are young women in India,
[Amit Varma]: who are having trouble negotiating the realities of everyday life and
[Amit Varma]: everything, what advice would you have for them? That's number one.
[Amit Varma]: And number two, if there are young academics and researchers,
[Amit Varma]: or even people who are not academics or researchers,
[Amit Varma]: but who are interested in diving deep into this world to understand it better.
[Amit Varma]: And by this world, I just mean Indian society in general,
[Amit Varma]: to understand it better, what advice would you have for them?
[Guest]: So I'll start with the advice for people who want to delve deep into this world.
[Guest]: Get out. Don't be online.
[Guest]: I sound like such a stuffy traditionalist, but I am a stuffy traditionalist.
[Guest]: Don't spend time on Instagram.
[Guest]: Don't think that self presentation on the internet is actually what's going to help
[Guest]: you delve deep into our society and do not believe that seeing how others are
[Guest]: representing themselves online is a way to better understand us.
[Guest]: I'm sure it tells us something about aesthetics and presentation,
[Guest]: but that I don't think is there's no reality. It's a hollow reality to me.
[Guest]: So I think the main advice I would have is,
[Guest]: don't be on the internet and don't always be looking at your phone,
[Guest]: because it programs your brain in a way to stymie a kind of creativity and curiosity.
[Guest]: And the second thing I would say to them is, read. Find a reader with you.
[Guest]: Because I found, for me, Amit, I have to say,
[Guest]: the sheer joy of this book and to read was actually to discuss these things with people
[Guest]: who you can create a community around, right? That is the joy of this.
[Guest]: And this is one of the small joys of life.
[Guest]: And so I would say, find a community that will read with you,
[Guest]: that will investigate with you, that will co-create this process with you.
[Guest]: And I think there's a sense of solidarity in that.
[Guest]: So I think I have very simple advice for people who are curious about the world,
[Guest]: don't be online, find solidarity networks, find a community.
[Guest]: I think that can be anything, whatever you'd like.
[Guest]: The question on women is a bit hard.
[Guest]: I would say two things, and I've actually thought about this
[Guest]: actually a fair amount as I was writing about the book,
[Guest]: not as advice, but just even for my own self.
[Guest]: I think, number one, stop giving premium to a kind of love
[Guest]: that you've been told to give premium to.
[Guest]: So it's fine if the boy that, and I have to just,
[Guest]: it's sad that I think so much of women's realities are just,
[Guest]: especially young women's realities are so dictated by this thing about,
[Guest]: you know, the boyfriend Olympics is what I call it.
[Guest]: It's fine if it doesn't work out and it's okay.
[Guest]: There's no shame in it, that it does not mean you're unworthy,
[Guest]: unbeautiful, all of those things.
[Guest]: I think it's okay to deviate from those scripts, and so I think that's one.
[Guest]: The second thing I would say to women who are really struggling
[Guest]: to just actuate their ambitions is find art.
[Guest]: And I don't just mean art in the sense of something you do,
[Guest]: but something you consume, something you participate in.
[Guest]: Just being able to access something that's outside of your own reality
[Guest]: and outside of your own milieu, I find that very helpful.
[Guest]: It saved me at a time when I was really going through a very rough time,
[Guest]: and I have to confess that had it not been for the books I was reading
[Guest]: and had it not been for Mr. Khan, I think I would be
[Guest]: a very different kind of wreck, a conformist wreck perhaps.
[Guest]: And I have him and various feminists and books to,
[Guest]: and economists to thank because I was reading their wonderful works.
[Guest]: So I would say try and lose yourself a little bit in something else.
[Guest]: And ideally this links to that whole notion of delight,
[Guest]: that I think women are told that you should just do things that are,
[Guest]: that have drudgery.
[Guest]: No, you should find something that you truly enjoy,
[Guest]: spend some time on it.
[Guest]: And I think through that, you may actually surprise yourself
[Guest]: that internally, psychologically navigating your life,
[Guest]: you might find instruction in those moments of delight for yourself.
[Guest]: And so I think to young women, I would say,
[Guest]: retire a little bit from the boyfriend Olympics.
[Guest]: If it doesn't work out, it's fine.
[Guest]: If it works out, it's fine.
[Guest]: Don't take it as seriously as I know girls in their early 20s
[Guest]: and in their teens do, please don't.
[Guest]: If they're watching this or they're listening to this,
[Guest]: or if their mothers are.
[Guest]: And the second is just find delight.
[Guest]: Find delight in art or find delight in whatever you like.
[Guest]: But I think delight is politics.
[Guest]: I really believe that that helps.
[Amit Varma]: That's lovely advice.
[Amit Varma]: I've learned so much from reading your book and from this conversation.
[Amit Varma]: So thank you for writing the book
[Amit Varma]: and thank you for giving me four hours of your time.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you so much, Amit.
[Guest]: It was such a pleasure.
[Guest]: I'm such a, I think, you know, I'm a fan and I love the show
[Guest]: and more power to you and what you're trying to do.
[Guest]: It was just a delight to be here.
[Guest]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you. Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: at scene unseen.in
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.